[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Some sort of bunkers. In different ways, I thought.

I was helping. Them in.

I want to say thank you.

To. Go away.

Stay. Six. Many.

This is. Um.

I just think you. Know this.

Not. I have to say.

Oh, yeah. All right.

Well. Good morning. You all there?

Oh, well, I'm in kind of a hotel. This is just a new name and development policy strategy and and.

It's going to be, uh, a rough ride. Uh, adventure, I hope.

So we have a great pitching theme in this this year.

Um, and then shortly, we've created our poll to start getting closer.

So in this way, we will do have a questionnaire where you have to tell us a little bit about who you are.

So I know the audience more and we don't.

We're going to take time from class to, to find out.

Okay. And and we have our slack channel here for.

Intellectual conversation that to go on in class. This is our teaching theme.

And you get one guy uh, joining us that are both former NBA kids that are both,

uh, that looks at the growth club and they're both contributing to the past year.

So you're accumulating a lot of experience. And we have a faculty assistant, Allison Moroney, for you.

She says that might help you schedule things with your whatever.

Okay. And. So in there, you know, we're going to address tough questions.

You know, questions of income and growth differentials I want to talk a little bit about that for you this past year is this is about diagnosing.

And I think, you know, diagnosing is a really important thing that you do in real life as a professional,

but not the way we teach things in economics.

What do we teach students in economics, since we tell you this is a model.

For this we model. And then the model has some parameters.

And then they ask you what happens if you change this problem.

Correct. Comparative statics. So if this is the model and you raise interest rates what will happen if you lower the tax rate.

What happens. So it's all what if questions is typical.

But in real life you are not told what the problem is.

They don't tell you hey you know what's the model.

They just tell you. People are unhappy.

This outcome is you know, it was high unemployment.

People are upset. And whatever it is, tell me what the [INAUDIBLE] is going on.

And it's up to you to figure out what's happening.

And it's up to you to figure out what do you want to look at, how you're going to think about data.

What do you think is the underlying model that may be giving rise to that data?

Right. How do you check that your story makes sense, right.

You have the right interpretation of what's going on.

So how do you develop from there a theory of change and what it is that you would need to do if you

wanted to change the outcomes from the what the ones you have to the ones you wish there were.

Right. And that's kind of like very different from the standard way economics gets taught.

So this is going to have a little bit of alternative flavor.

So we're going to develop the strategies for getting to those theories of change.

Okay. So um and so what would you need to do to change the situation and what policy levers you could eventually use?

Another thing that is typical in economics is that they say is trade policy good or bad?

I'm not sure. Does doesn't trade liberalization improve welfare or we do slow.

Right. And that again, it's sort of like there's no patient, there's no context, there's nothing right.

And it's about what is it that you're trying to achieve.

So so it has a kind of like a different flavor.

That's what I'm to say. In the process of growth, we'll find that diversification is an important dimension to it.

We're going to talk about diversification possibilities.

And that's what the whole economic complexity framework is going to help us do.

And we're going to try to answer that question in the context of a decarbonizing world.

Okay. So we will use that framework to aim to to to speak to that.

We're going to talk about space spatial dimensions to markets.

Both a we've worked in a bunch of countries.

And when I say we I mean the growth that and let me just say that the growth that is going to have an open house sometime in September 26th I think.

So you get to know more what is what it is that we're doing and what are the opportunities for engagement and stuff.

But, you know, we've worked on a bunch of places that, you know, the first thing that comes to mind is that they're just far.

But we worked on Western Australia, we worked on Kazakhstan, we worked on Namibia, we worked on the Colombian Amazon.

And it's just, you know, are hard to get there.

Right. And so the question is, okay, and all the models that you and all the theories.

How do you incorporate that into your diagnosis and how do you incorporate that

into the kinds of things that you think would be feasible in that context?

So we've done work on that. We want to talk about that. And we're also going to talk about cities.

So I'm very much interested in in studying the growth of cities now.

And so if you ask yourself analytically the question what's the difference between a city and a country?

Right. And then how should I think about city growth as opposed to country problems?

And what is sort of the differences and what are some anyway?

So we're going to get into into that and we're going to talk about macro diagnostics.

Because oftentimes you go to country and I don't know Lester we worked on in Lebanon.

You know, it's hard to talk about too many other things in Lebanon if you are facing a major macroeconomic mess.

And so you have to so you have to you want to understand what the [INAUDIBLE] is happening on the macro front.

And we spent a couple of weeks on macro. Again, you'll find the significant distance between your one year of macro and the way it comes up here.

Because in your one year macro it's all been this is the model.

These are the comparative statics of the model. When when we get to interview people for the growth of there, the typical question we ask is,

you know, what the [INAUDIBLE] do you think is happening here?

What we're trying to see if you can go from data to an interpretation of what might be happening.

And and my experience is that people.

Have trouble with that in this classroom and after that, after this class.

So when I try to go in but in, in a, you know, in a, as I said in shopping day, I don't know if you attended,

but I showed some data to show that, you know, recessions in industrialized countries tend to be small.

You know, you you see much larger catastrophes in, in developing countries, um, or even in Greece or not.

And you might ask yourself a question, why what what what generates these abilities,

these fragilities in countries, or how do you want to think about their origins?

So we'll dedicate time to that. We will also talk about unemployment inequality and how to diagnose those things.

And um, I think what you will get impressed is that is that where countries might be equally unequal,

and if they're very unequal in what causes them to be mean? Okay.

So the places, you know, you want to understand what are the relevant dimensions or things that may cause inequality in a particular context.

And they don't travel well. They don't travel well.

So this is more or less the, the nature of of course we're going to start with a little bit of growth theories.

Okay. Then we're going to go to this economic complexity framework.

We're going to expand the economic complexity framework by introducing public goods to it and by introducing policy.

So we're about to have some sense of what policy looks like in this space.

Okay. Um, how do you think of policy? Then we're going to add these three extra topics.

One is remoteness, one is regrowth and one is cities.

Okay. And then and then we're going to do growth diagnostics.

Uh, couple of weeks on growth diagnostics a couple of weeks or micro diagnostics.

And then we're going to go from diagnostics to therapeutics.

And we're going to end with, uh, a framework. You know, how do you embed strategy in the political realities of economies.

So okay, so that's uh, that's where we want to go.

Good. Okay. So in principle, every week we have review sessions on Friday.

Uh, some weeks I'm going to swap the review sessions for the lecture.

Uh, and so I think a couple of times it's announced.

So review sessions are important and very important to make your life easier when you do the assignments at work.

Because we introduce external ferial in. Okay.

So this is our our grading strategy.

So encourage class participation. And up to now you get a zero.

So. Uh the two individual problem sets three group problem sets.

And the final group submission, which is going to be a core presentation of a diagnostic theory of change,

a strategy that we're going to do for one country or a state or a city.

Okay. Good. So if you need to choose a group.

So throughout the course you will develop your own group diagnostic of a country.

You need to work in groups of three or maximum four.

We have a condition that since many of the people who take the course that it will be MPVs, that if it is four, you have to open up to a non-empty.

Okay. So uh. And you want to check whether you can get good data for the country you're going to work on.

These are some of the data that are typically hardest to get.

So this we don't want you to be wasting your time just getting data.

So hopefully it's you you spend your time analyzing data.

So so you want the household survey and you want the a good fiscal statistics.

Typically the other statistics are easier to get.

And and the a you we have a Google sheet for you to submit your your proposal for country state or or city.

Okay. Uh and Johanna and you are more going to send an email uh, more with more detail on this.

Okay. So to get get you going quickly, a we have already posted the problem set number one.

And the idea of problem set number one is just for you to get your statistical programing skills refreshed.

And in this course we have a a set up.

We've put together some data sets that are the accumulation of many data sets that there that you'll find uh,

particularly useful and, or, and, or you'll get analysis of the course.

But we just want you to. Get their own game on how to do things with these data sets.

Okay. Okay.

So okay, so I want to start with three questions.

We're going to do some progress. Okay. If we left just to get our intuitions boy I want very quick responses.

So there's a premium for quickness okay.

Of of the response. Uh I don't want you to do any calculations.

I want you to use your your system one, not your system two.

Okay. Uh, and so this is in the following problem.

Could you have an E coli bacteria, you know, can you follow bacteria?

Is this really small thing? Is is it a half of one thousandths of a millimeter in radius?

Okay. And has a volume of ten to the -12 cubic centimeter.

I don't know what to help them. Two -12 looks like, but, you know, it's really small okay.

Cubic centimeter I mean, I know what a cubic, but 10 to -12 one trillionth of a cubic centimeter.

Okay. Okay. Now it has the opportunity.

If you double every 20 minutes, it can double every 20 minutes.

And I just want to know how big a colony if you start with one E coli bacteria.

How big when the follow. Maybe after one day, after two days and after five days if it if it it grows out.

If it doubles every every 20 minutes okay. And and so, um.

You go ahead. So how big you start with this.

10 to -12. One survey completed.

24 survey is underway. Okay.

26 is on the way. You're taking too long.

This sounds like. It sounds like you're cheating. I said intuitively, system one on.

I'll on it. There's two questions. Wait for the problem.

The other two questions. Yeah. They can keep it in Africa, huh?

You can move ahead. I move ahead. Okay. Uh, so, um.

Okay, so the next question. But one second, the next question is, um, is about the Jewish calendar.

Okay. So according to the Jewish calendar, Adam and Eve lived a 5784 years ago.

Okay. And so human population started with two.

Now I'm going to suppose that since that time to the present,

the population of the world did not grow like at 3%, like Iran and many of the developing countries,

or like a 2% like in most of my time, etc. but it only grew at 1%, at 1%, which is, you know, the rate of growth like in the US now.

Okay, so 1% population growth. Okay.

So um, the question is if you start with two and it grows at 1% for 5784 years, what would be in today's population?

Okay. And so so what would be today's population?

Okay, so let me not show you the continent so you don't influence each other.

Yes, I think that is this is already in the same it's in the same link because I'm only seeing the bacteria.

Oh yeah. What happens next? Is it the same thing?

The same thing. But it's not exercising.

It's the fourth question. It's a separate question.

Important information. Okay. Sorry.

Sorry. Don't call us. Okay. So let me let me go to discuss the previous one.

So after one day, a down mode is at the size of a bucket.

And after two days, the mode is the size of this classroom.

Right. And after five days, it would be a larger than diameter.

Okay. But there's. But only 33% of people think that.

Okay. So after one day repair of basketball.

Well, after one day, it will be a sphere of 12m in diameter.

After one day would be a sphere of 12m in diameter.

So I guess 13% of people or.

Okay, after two days. So immediately is the size of the size of a stadium.

Actually, after two days it would be bigger than planet Earth.

It would be a ball halfway to the distance of the moon. Okay.

After two days and after five days, it will be larger than the known universe.

Okay. It will be larger than the known universe. Which means it would have covered the distance to the Earth.

You know, the known universe is 13.7 billion year light years of 13.7 billion light years.

It wouldn't have gotten there in five days. Okay.

It would have all time to find resources on the universe. Yeah.

Well, so that's a very good point, which has to do with in Tuesday's lecture,

which is that obviously these growth processes are going to be limited by resources.

Right. That something will have to be balanced by an, uh, what we call called the carrying capacity of the environment or something.

Right. We're going in that direction. But it's just what I'm trying to.

So okay, so that's that's the answer to the first question.

Let me give you the answer to the second question. Well, if you started with Adam and Eve today, I mean.

A, the population would be 1.69.

To a 25. Now, what the [INAUDIBLE] is that number? So one way to make it intuitive is let's divide that number by the current population.

So let's find out how many people per capita would we have.

Had the population grown at 1%. Okay.

And that means it would have been 2.55 trillion people per capita.

2.55 trillion people per capita.

This is just to show, and the whole point of this exercise is that we don't have good intuitions for the consequences of growth.

Where intuitions are typically off by a lot, by a [INAUDIBLE] of a lot.

Okay, so the actual rate.

So you got from 2 to 9 billion. Because it grew at 0.38.

But the benefit had grown from two. And instead of growing at 0.38, it had grown at 1%.

We would be at 10 to 25. Okay. So that's that's a subcommittee of the process.

So the importance of growth is that it accumulates over time, growth and time are you know, we don't have a good sense of timescales.

One interesting way of thinking about the timescale of the process is asking, how long would it take for the process for the stuff to double?

That gives you a sense of, you know, what time scales we're talking about.

It's a good metric to measure. So there is this 69 rule in that if you divide 69 by the rate of growth, it gives you the time problem.

So if you grow at 6.9% and you double it ten years okay.

So it gives you time to go, okay. If you grow at 1% and doubling 69 years and so on.

Okay. So when we talk about growth, we talk about relative.

We don't talk about quarterly data but yearly data.

We need to let the process have its time to do its thing.

And so I want to think of ourselves in terms of generations.

Okay. Like for example I.

I am a father. I have a father. My father's still alive.

He's 98. I have children.

I have grandchildren. I have six grandchildren.

Okay. So you have four generations there. I like to take pictures with the four generations together.

Okay. So you have to ask yourself the question. What was life like when you were 15?

Like, was there color TV when you were 15? Was there, you know?

Was it. Did you have cell phones when New York's 15 or whatever.

So so how how does life change over a generation?

Okay. Let's say generation is 25 years. Okay.

So let's let's say a and you know,

I should update this because it gets students very nervous that most of the students in the class are past 25 and they don't yet have children.

Obviously, the generation is a little bit more than 25 these days, but I think the numbers are 25 or so.

And so the point is that if you grow, if you're going to look at what happens after one generation,

save 25 years and what happens after two generations. Okay.

And and this is the percentage growth a cumulative percentage growth after 25 years.

And this is not a percentage growth. This is just how many times it would have grown right.

So if you grow at 1% in the course of a generation, incomes would have gone up by 28%, right.

And over the course of two generations by 64%.

Okay. If instead you grow 8%, then your children will be 585% means that they'll be seven times richer,

seven times you and your grandchildren will be 47 times richer.

47 as your grandparents would have lived with 2% of your income.

Right. So. These are very different thoughts.

So I'm going to calculate how fast has the world grown over the last 25 years and over the last 50 years to see if you know.

Are we here or where are we. If you grow at 6%, it's 329%.

You know, more than quadruple the income. And and a, you know, grandchildren would be 18 times richer under grandparents.

Right. Okay. So let's look at the data for the world.

And this is the data for the world by regions with GDP per capita.

And this is rate of growth of GDP per capita. And we see East Asia Pacific grew at a little bit more than 6% in this period.

And the world grew at a little bit under 2% of.

And in the low income countries group I met. So we they became poorer relative to the world.

And sub-Saharan Africa grew by less. Okay.

And you're a group by more than the world.

So you know so this is six this is for for South Asia, middle income for means 167% over generation seven control.

For a 50 year period. Again, East Asia comes at 6%.

A bunch of people at fourth home. And then the world that more or less two.

And sub-Saharan Africa in the last 50 years by significant investment to Middle East by significantly less than to its income.

And this is sort of by country. Okay.

So we're talking about a differences in growth rates that are very large okay, across different parts of the world.

And they lead to very different pathways.

So when you think of the next generation, you know, if you think that like we used to think we are richer than Korea.

And when I say we Latin Americans, we're rich Korea, we're richer than Hong Kong.

You would never work for the kinds of wages that these people work for in the textile industry and so on.

And and I would look at that very long, multiple times richer than we are.

So, so it happened over the course of my lifetime. And so, so things change.

So you know anybody know where this is. Well, it's hard to know where this is because today it looks like this.

This is Hong Kong. This is Shenzen in 1980 and this is Shenzhen today.

Okay. And this is, uh, some high in 1990.

I mean, 1998, I don't know, it looks like yesterday, 1990.

And this is Shanghai today. So, you know, growth.

If you give it time, it's super potentially transformative.

Okay. Super potentially transformative in a way that sort of, you know, you make small differences in growth rates.

They need to very different places. Small differences in Gini coefficient don't have anything.

You know, they don't accumulate over time. Don't. Okay.

Okay.

So you know, in some places, you know it's got more dimension, but it looks like some of the resilience in the room or the resilience in the room.

Well this is Brazil is really soft. So it's it's not all urbanization.

It's urbanization mixed with prosperity. Okay. So so this is a you know, the income per capita since the year zero.

And then a it has this hockey stick flavor to it.

It was very stagnant forever. And and we are going to analyze that in the next class as, as the fruits and tropical fruits and equilibrium.

But obviously something happened here. And when you zoom in to here you see that it happened differentially in different places.

And because it happened differentially in different places,

we will find that maybe some of the telltale signs of the Malthusian equilibrium are still to be observed in many of the countries around the world,

but they are maybe escaping the same trap.

But since it's a generational process of demographic change, it reflects itself in a lot of the characteristics of openness.

So let me ask another question.

How large were the growth differences that caused the divergence between Western Europe and Africa and sub-Saharan Africa?

So how much faster than Europe, Rome and Africa, so that now Europe is so much richer than Africa?

Okay. So first let me show. 2% 2% in which he is in the last two centuries.

0.5 percent 4% 4.4%.

Okay, so you see, let's get our intuitions going.

So, um, to get your intuition is going, I'm going to first give you the data now for the last 100 years.

But for the last 50 years. And this is a the medium.

So this is, uh, medium growth is a number between 1 and 2% for the world.

And the 25th to 75th percentile difference is 1.5%, and the 10th percentile to 90th percentile difference is 3.7%.

So your your 4% is the 10th to 90th percentile more or less.

And and uh, 25th to 75th percentile is 1.5.

Okay. So just to give us a sense of how much can these growth rates differ.

So in 18:20 a.m.

Western Europe was 2.9 times richer than than Africa.

And in 2000 it was 13 times richer. And Africa.

And the difference in growth rates was 0.9%.

So you were right that the setting. So I won't say the 1%.

Right. Okay. Who said that?

1%. No. Oh, sorry.

So, so. Okay. So. So it's just to say no small differences here.

No matter. They accumulate enough. Okay, so.

So these gaps are, uh, reinforced that if you take GDP per capita at market prices.

The poorest country in the world today is probably four times richer than India's Mali.

Four times richer than Mali is Bolivia. Four times richer than Bolivia, Romania, and four times richer than Romania as a straight.

Okay. Now it's interesting. All right.

And. So this is between countries.

Between states in a country a and this is Mexican states a the poorest state is Japanese,

where we did some work and it will appear in the course, um, will illustrate things with.

Us a couple of times. It's a chop.

I mean, the richest state in Mexico is six times richer and.

But if you look within chia bars at different municipalities in of us, there's a gap of a factor of eight.

So there are very large differences in incomes between countries, within countries, even within states of a country.

Okay. And. So in 1820, a the richest country in the world was a Netherlands.

It was 5.9, 5.2 times richer than the poorest country in the Madison data set, which wasn't about.

That. And and in that data set, you only have 55 countries.

The 95th to two fifth percentile was 3.9.

So the gaps between rich and poor countries is a factor for those days.

Markets factor for what I'm just showing you is a factor of 256.

Right. So so it means that these gaps have exploded because of of cumulative growth.

Secondly, the richest country in the world today is Singapore.

And controlling for BP. It's 130 times richer than Budi.

So just to say how much these types of people have won.

So this shows and in the 95 to 50 95th percentile is has gone up by a factor of ten.

So there's been global divergence big time.

So there's this been an explosion of between country inequality.

Okay, so now you might. Yes. Uh, how divergence is moving through time.

Because before pandemic was, uh, the garden was closing, but now I'm opening again.

So. So I don't know how important the pandemic is going to be.

I know how important a pandemic is going to be, uh, in the grand scheme of things.

More importantly is the commodity supercycle between 2004 and 2014,

when sub-Saharan Africa and Latin Americans did well, and then they have done poorly since.

But ehm, and there's, there's um.

Today there is still. So we are not diverging from anything, obviously not at the global level,

because China is growing faster than the world average and India is growing faster than the world average.

So and they have a third of a world population between the two.

So if China keeps on growing faster than the world now, it's going to increase world inequality.

Because the reason why world inequality was falling is because China was poor and growing fast.

So when the poor grow fast, inequality follows. But when the rich grow fast, the inequality widens.

But now that China is richer than the world medium, maybe now fast Chinese growth causes global inequality to rise.

So anyway, those are the. The, um, implications of complicated advantages.

So second question. Another question I want to ask is how persistent is growth.

How similar is the growth rate of a country between decades?

Yes, please. Uh, I was gonna, um, ask something similar to ask.

You asked. Um, so theoretically, you have, like, this theory of convergence, right.

Um, where the poorer countries should grow faster than the rich ones and ideally should converge,

like what is what is broken that is causing this theory that we've seen.

Actually, that's a fantastic question. And I want to address a lot of it on Tuesday in part.

And. I don't know if it would be a spoiler alert.

But, uh, we're going to see. That there is convergence in many dimensions of development.

Uh, divergence in incomes. And that's going to be a puzzle.

Uh, and the puzzle will spoiler a puzzle is going to say.

It's all about technology, but what the [INAUDIBLE] is technology and why would it be diverge?

That's, uh, that's one of the reasons why I'm so obsessed about technology.

But it's not because I started with. It's because it's the only positive.

But we have to have a theory of what technology is and how technology grows and why we can't catch up, but we're going to go in that direction.

Where is my clicker? Right here. So here I'm asking the question about persistence.

And to answer a question about persistence in. A I'm going to first trick you.

Right. So this is the growth rate across decades.

So this is the previous decade. This is the next decade.

And so if it's persistent this should look like a 45 degree line okay.

And it doesn't look like a 45 degree line. But the R-squared is like 153.

So there's a lot of persistence between decades. But I told you that I was going to trick you.

Because this is actually the growth rate of population. And population growth rates tend to be relatively slow moving variables.

Okay. If you do the same thing not with population but with GDP per capita across decades, you get this.

And the R-squared is essentially zero. Okay.

So growth rates are not very persistent across decades.

Yes. But aren't there are there some countries that are able to retain fairly consistent growth?

Yeah, definitely. There must be. And so those are the ones that are probably on this end here.

They you know they're growing. Yeah. So China definitely Korea definitely.

We know these these examples of sustained growth episodes.

But they are more of an exception than the rule.

So. Yeah. Okay.

So so then the next question is what should countries do to become rich.

Okay. Now. I'm going to abuse correlations.

So I'm going to look at what is it that the rich do that is different from the poorer for example.

The rich tend to use suits more than the poor.

Right. So maybe that's the reason why we're rich. Right.

So. So. But I'm going to just tell you, you know, how are the rich different from the book?

I'm not telling you anything about Roseanne. Okay. Okay.

The rich, by definition, have higher incomes. They tend to be more urbanized.

They tend to have smaller agricultural sectors. They tend to have a lower fertility, lower infant mortality, lower population growth rates.

They tend to be more educated. They tend to be more democratic and freer.

Right. And they tend to have bigger governments and have better governments.

Okay. So so those are characteristics that countries.

Well, the rich share the poor share baby.

They seem to be consistent in these dimensions.

And this has led to what some economists in the founding days of development economics called for full transformation.

And it's it's a transformation of the economy. It's a transformation of the capacity of state.

It's a transformation of the quality in terms of the expression of political preferences.

And it's a transformation of social norms where people treat each other more equally, they are equal before the law, etc.

So, so these transformations were kind of like part of an overarching process.

All right. So I'm going to look at whether all of these things are true.

So I'm going to run a bunch of scatter runs like this one okay.

We're going to put GDP per capita on the x axis and years of schooling on the y axis.

I'm here here I'm putting years of schooling but I could output anything else.

And so this says in, you know, good rich countries tend to have more schooling than poor countries.

Okay. And this years of schooling of their labor force not sorry.

It's not current education but education, prior tools, life experience.

But in order not to show you all of these messy scatter grams, I'm going to fit a line through the cloud.

And I'm going to just show you the line. Okay. So so this is a one graph.

This is so this is years of schooling. This is capital per worker.

So rich countries have workers that work with more machines or more capital.

So it's always very much you know a hub Douglas right.

And there's less infant mortality in rich countries.

There's lower fertility rates in rich countries. Sometimes you're seeing the rich get rich and the poor get children.

And and look at these birth rates.

Now this is births for a woman six and a half years for work.

Right. This is population growth.

Okay. So population growth faster in poor countries.

This is urbanization rate. So the rich are more urbanized.

Be the rich have a smaller share of their GDP in agriculture.

The rich have more employment in industry and the rich have more employment and services.

So you move out of agricultural and industrial services.

They consume more energy. They have more effective governments.

Okay. They are freer.

Part of the freedom index.

Okay, so the process of development seems to be related somehow to structural transformation and the change in the composition of output.

It seems to be related to urbanization, to demographic changes, to education, to institutions and all of that.

You guys and idea at least saw in depth one on one and so on, and was part of the of the issues you discussed.

We will deal with some of them in coming lectures, but I'm now I'm going to ask myself a question.

This is what differs rich countries from poor countries.

But what did countries do in all of these dimensions?

I by the way, I tricked you again because we all know all of these graphs.

This one I did for 1990, this one I did for 1980, this one I did for 1970.

So all of them I did for the past. Okay.

And now I can redo them, but for the present. So I'm going to show you the same graphs now.

But the a different, you know, the past or the present okay.

So I showed you this graph of years of schooling and income per capita for 1970.

Now I'm going to compare it with 2010. Right now.

What is our expectation of what it is that we're going to observe when you're comparing 1917 to 2010?

One important thing that has changed and that I mentioned in our conversation is technology, right?

So you're saying in 2010 technology is much more advanced than in 1970.

As a consequence, as we just looked up a this curve should have moved out.

Meaning that with the same education and better technology, you should be able to generate more output, right?

So that's right. So obviously.

No, that's not what happened. What happened is that everybody went to school but they didn't get richer.

That is how they increased education.

I mean, had the curve remained constant. sub-Saharan Africa would have gone from here to there in terms of income per capita.

Instead, they just got more education. Mhm. So it means that you cannot used a cross-section in the time series if you are completely confused,

if you think that these differences between rich and poor countries are caused by differences in orientation.

No. Okay. So you, you kind of like increased education.

You didn't increase incomes and university education.

You might say, no, it's really university education. What happened to university education between 1978?

Now same story. People went to university.

They left the country, did not become richer. Now this is a trick, Ralph.

Again, I mean. I'm using these graphs to trick your.

Your expectations of what you're going to see.

But I know this graph because this graph. Is GDP per capita against energy use.

And I've used for countries okay.

And so and blue is blue. And red is Chile and green is Korea.

And in in orange is UK. It's the only one that kind of.

Doesn't fit into a straight line. Right.

A well for all you see it didn't it didn't grow too much.

A lot of blue dots are more or less around the same place.

Korea grew a [INAUDIBLE] of a lot. So it started down here and ended up all the way up there.

Right. And Chile grew a little bit more than Peru. So it's you know, it was low here and then it went up.

Right. But they're all sort of like along the same line if you tell me or your GDP per capita,

I'm going to guess your energy use per capita, I'm not going to get it right.

But my error terms are not going to be that high. Right?

I want to make a mistake here because obviously the UK, the industrialized, um,

Korea went into heavy industry, into steel and shipbuilding and stuff like that.

That uses a lot of energy. So, so, you know, finance or some use that much energy.

So, so that's why until they invented, um, what's it called.

And the acronym crypto.

Okay. So this is energy and GDP per capita. So let me do the same story.

But not with energy per capita but with education. And let me show you how it looks with education.

Does the graph before changes want to use and consumption and not energy um production cost energy consumption could be global.

It would have looked more along along the straight line.

Yes. Good point. Thanks. So here is Ghana.

It went up in education. Tyler Income grew it as it went up in education Mexico and France.

If I compare them when they reach seven years of schooling.

So not at a certain date, but a certain level of schooling on the labor force.

Gonna reach a in seven years of schooling in 1998 before Thailand.

But Thailand was almost seven times richer than Ghana at the same level of education.

And then Mexico reached that level of education 12 years before Thailand.

But Mexico was almost twice as rich as Thailand when it reached that level of education.

And then France reached that level of education, say, eight years before Mexico won.

By then, France was twice as rich as Mexico.

So tell me your level of schooling.

I really have very little that I can guess about your level of income.

It's not like anything. Okay, so.

Yes, um, there is, uh, version of these graphs with, uh, a measure instead of schooling as a proxy for education.

Uh, some knowledge type of a measure of education, like the Pisa score or, uh, some standardized test.

Yeah, yeah. So, um, I think the the only reason why I don't do use those too much is that we don't have a good time series on these data,

so you can do the cross-section and,

and then the cross-section, you find that the, uh, you know,

if I find in the cross-section that the rich have more years of schooling and you have that the rich have better Pisa scores.

So more or less confirms the story I was saying before.

But it doesn't work too much better in terms of growth rates.

So you got your Pisa scores. Don't necessarily predict how well you're going to do.

But back to the question that also is, given the amount of increase in education.

What do you need to assume in terms of deteriorating quality to compensate for the massive increase in quantity?

For it not to have had bigger impacts on output?

Okay.

So in some sense it really pressures you have to tortured the data on quantity to make it to compensate for these enormous increases in quantity.

So this is the evolution of gamma and time in education.

So gamma is we want any classification faster than you can increase the number in time.

Yeah I mean the benefit is that you have numbers in how you come in English individual.

I'm sure I've given I mean some advantage. Yes. So if there's no correlation between years of education and per capita GDP.

But if you recall there is an a cross-section in the cross-section.

I know the time series, but not in the time series.

But if you were to shift it to kind of share people with human capital, that's at the tech frontier.

That's really close to what the new skills are. Do you think that would show up?

In. I know where I'm going to go.

In a different direction. That the education that matters is not something that can be measured at the intensive level.

This is the average level of education of the labor force average.

And then something that is happening more at the extensive level, which is a little bit where you want to push things.

But, you know, some people say what percentage of your labor force is in R&D?

Well, that's the same story. You know, the rich have more than the poor.

Right. And it's much more skewed. Why? There are no people doing R&D in Korea or in China 20 years ago, right?

They grow by leaps and bounds for a long time. So probably we we need to.

We'll need to ask you about a little bit of, you know, a one variable story to try to understand what's happening.

So this is the evolution of education. We're gonna be Tyler.

And this is the evolution of GDP per capita, where we started at a similar level and five became seven times richer.

Okay. And it's kind of like, obviously not. Cannot be explained by education.

Yeah. Uh, professor, uh, for, uh, years of education.

Is it possible for you to, to break down what type of education do you think, for example, in Ghana?

Because when I been to Ghana, I've met a lot of doctors and lawyers, but I've met a few.

Engineers are doing Stem subjects.

Is it like you can break down on like what type of education they paid?

I mean, I am complaining that, you know, Unicef has not put together data on what are the different careers that people study in tertiary education?

How many study accounting, how many study engineering? How many study medicine?

How many study? I don't know social work.

So what is it that they're learning, etc.? We don't have those data to do cross-section of the actual, but I think it would be interesting.

I've been trying to get data on what do foreign students do when they go to the U.S.,

because my impression is that the Indians and the Chinese, I'm not gonna go to MIT and the Latin American to try to get into HBS.

And so and but, uh, you know, there might be there might be a story there,

but then it would not be on this average education, but would be something on the composition.

And there might be a story to be told there. And that's actually where we're going to go in in several ways.

Yes. Uh, I think that a proxy to the questions would be the industries that are present in that country,

because, for example, people don't study petroleum engineering.

Places where there's no petroleum industry, you know, so you can yeah, I guess, uh,

maybe there's going to be more degrees related to some kind of engineering if you have that industry in that country.

Right. That that is a really good comment.

But that also says that education then probably is endogenous, right?

That the reason why you are studying something is because there's demand for that something.

Right? And then you would say, you cannot say, well, you they got a lot of education.

That's what they grew. No, no, they had a lot of something that caused them to want to have a lot of education,

because parents realized that maybe an education was a ticket to prosperity, because the economy was demanding a lot of education.

And this was a surprising response to that thing.

So we might be over stressing the importance of education when education is actually the outcome of the same thing that's generating the growth.

It's it's, um, it's, uh, it's it's a whole moving variable to do this really important variable that's driving the process.

Right? So, yes. Good. So, um, let me show you infant mortality, infant mortality also for us.

So that means that you can you can be poor and survive.

Right. Because so we this is, um, the infant mortality just fell across the board.

Fertility rates fell across the board. Um, it didn't make you rich.

So. So it's to help the rich get richer and the poor get children.

I stopped getting children. It doesn't make me rich. Um, population growth fell more or less everywhere in agriculture.

Everybody abandoned agriculture. Everybody actually abandoned industry.

This is the deindustrialization story that Danny Robert likes to say.

Um, everybody went into services. But again, there's kind of like more structural transformation in these dimensions.

And there is development. Okay. So. Everybody became more urbanized.

So subsaharan Africa increased a lot its rate of urbanization, but it didn't make them richer.

Um, and this is something like a comparison.

Like like um, anybody here from GTA?

Oh, I'm so sorry. I can relax.

Huh. So I'm comparing Turkey in 2020 to the Netherlands in 1960.

So I'm comparing two countries 60 years apart. And in 2020, a turkey beats the [INAUDIBLE] of the Netherlands in everything.

Good. But in 2020, Turkey has technology that is 60 years more advanced than the technology that was in 1960.

So you match the Netherlands and everything. You know, you beat the [INAUDIBLE].

I mean, post-secondary education is 3.8% to 19%, right?

Percent completed secondary education is 3% to 36%.

You know, higher education is 0.8 to 14.

So, you know, you beat the [INAUDIBLE] the [INAUDIBLE] out of them, right?

And 60 years later, a turkey still doesn't catch up with the Netherlands.

Okay. Okay, so the puzzle is that the world has become more urbanized, more educated, more open.

It has undergone the productive transformation. It was seen earlier in leading countries.

And but when the leading countries were as urbanized, as fertile, as open, as educated,

as endowed with physical and human capital, a and and even though the technology has improved over time,

a, you know, these developing countries are not catching up or the countries that that are undergoing that transformation are not not catching up.

Okay. So so that's that's a little bit of a puzzle.

And that's that, that's a part of what we were trying to catch, you know.

A. Some people say it's institutions.

Go ahead Karl. Um, I have a question. Why?

If these kind of differences are so stark, is it still very common for people to say, oh, the way to grow is to reduce infant mortality?

The way to grow is to reduce education. Even though the data very clearly states that this doesn't really work.

Well, I mean, I have always been against justifying policies on the basis of growth.

So I would say if you want to reduce infant mortality, let's reduce infant mortality because it's a tragedy.

If you've got a kid who's been robbed of his life and so on and so forth.

But to reduce infant mortality because it's going to have an effect on long run growth.

Suppose I convince you that treating older people reduces growth because it takes resources away from more productive things than,

you know, taking care of old, retired people.

So if I convinced you that that was the case, reducing those health expenditures would be good for growth.

Would you cut them? So I don't want to go too much on justifying policy priorities on the basis of growth.

I just want to know whether those policies are an instrument in the growth process, and how would they be an instrument in the growth process.

So do I need. Can I use it as my part of my growth strategy, or do I need a growth strategy to be able to fund that policy?

Okay. And that to me is a more interesting question.

But I want to in this in this first lecture, in some sense to clear our palate because too much of the development story is about this silver bullets.

And I understand because there is a very important role for advocacy when you're trying to coordinate public action,

and advocacy requires for you to come up with many arguments that will make people support a certain course of action.

And I think advocacy is fine, but not here, not in this classroom, because in this classroom, we are trying to figure out what should we advocate for?

Right. And in a particular context. And it might be if I'm worked out, I mean,

I would do a lot of stuff in Guatemala because what the manner has ridiculous

rates of infant malnutrition that we don't understand where it comes from.

And that obviously must have something to do with their ability to accumulate human capital and other things.

So but it can't be that no child malnutrition.

No. I have a child malnutrition problem know program in Norway because it's been shown to be important in Guatemala.

Right. So so we want to understand context before we start, you know, figuring out what do we think is a policy problem.

And now quality of schooling. I've already mentioned that, you know, you really have to assume diverging, not not differences in levels of quality,

but diverging levels of quality to compensate for the convergent level levels of quantity of education.

I didn't mention institutions, but we're hearing the question is institutions are good enough to extend lives,

to lower infant mortality, to educate people, to put them in tertiary education, to urbanize.

Institutions are good enough for that, but not for income convergence.

So tell me a story that we're educated where institutions are good enough for some things, but not for income, for purpose, and for many things.

Things that are super important, urbanizing, educated.

You extend the life. You're not even in their other dimensions, right?

But for so. And technology as ideas.

So here the idea is that technology is ideas, and ideas are public goods.

They are hard to produce but easy to copy.

Right? So if you go to the, you know, countries at the global frontier are spending a lot of money in R&D trying to come up with something,

but since they're just ideas, anybody can use that that could lead to convergence.

That would lead to convergence, right.

So a this suggests that if large is just ideas that are easy to move around, then it could not possibly be an explanation of what we're observing.

Okay. So why is all of this.

So that's why we have a whole semester ahead of us.

So. So I mean, I have 7 minutes or 8 minutes to discuss.

So let's go ahead. Let's just one quick question. What about on this technology.

But what about geopolitical alignments or helping transfer of technologies and knowhow from, you know,

French economy that doesn't need balance and some growth differential about FDI all the time.

Transfer of technologies. Yeah. So I was just wondering, well, um.

So it's interesting that you say to transfer technology you might need FDI, but FDI is going to need a lot of specific stuff,

because if I know how to do something and then I show you, how do I make money out of my intellectual property, so what, what I need to have.

But I'm also going to probably mix my investment with some capital, some machines and stuff, and maybe you go out and expropriate my investment.

So if I if that's what happens in step two, I'll never invest in step one.

So so then there might be other things that might be complicating the, the movement of of technology.

But right now, the US is making best efforts to prevent technology from getting to China.

And they're failing, right. They're trying to prevent technology from getting to Russia.

Through most extensive, uh, sanction regimes.

And they're unable to do it. Actually, you know, the the government of Colombia, the government of the U.S., and so on is trying to prevent.

Narco trafficking. And it still thrives.

So so the question is if if you tell me this, if you were to move this technology from here to there,

it would generate a lot of value and somebody would want to appropriate them.

So why is it that they're not doing that? I mean, if you tell me, look, if you just move technology from here to there.

It would have big effects. Somebody can monetize that, and if you make it illegal, they'll find ways to do it anyway.

So why is this not happening here right now?

And then we go to you. Can we focus on a bit more about fertility rates.

Because what I saw that it went down globally might be two countries that are similar close to each other.

And one went down more and grew more.

You know, maybe the circumstances to fertility rate in 2020 are different from, you know, not wanted, you know.

I mean. I mean, maybe the motivations of a reduction in fertility rates or so, maybe.

And maybe a it's not the reduction in fertility rate, but it's in whatever caused the reduction in fertility rates.

So let me tell me, in this case,

the reduction in fertility rates was caused because my story would be there's a big increase in the demand for human capital.

And parents are shifting between quantity of children and quantity of children in the language of Gary Becker.

And so it is actually the increase in demand for human capital that is causing growth.

And that increased demand for human capital is now going to be reflected in falling fertility rate as a consequence of that.

But if you just tell me, look, there's been drought and and crime and change.

And so now it rains less agricultural output is lower.

And then I cannot make a living in rural areas.

So I go to the city, I go to city. And sometimes because I am pushed out of rural areas.

But in the city, children are much more expensive than in the countryside.

So maybe fertility rates decline because of an increase in the cost of children.

Not because of an increase in the returns to human capital. So then I would be observing the same kind of reduction in fertility.

But what if, for completely different reasons and with completely different stories for economic growth?

What I would say there is that the real driver of the story is somewhere else,

and it's being reflected through this media and variable in the same ways.

But that's so that would be one, one way of making sense of what you just said, I think.

Thank you.

I have a bit more philosophical point, which is maybe the GDP that we're observing is not the correct reflection of increasing the living standards.

So, for example, maybe the dollar value like 60 years ago was more less valuable than now.

So let's say like $1 would get to like $10 against a toilet.

Um, that's like back then it's just like a very mechanical net nowadays.

Bigger, more advanced ones. And maybe even though in Turkey the GDP is lower than the Netherlands GDP back then,

maybe the living standards of individuals itself is different because that GDP can get you a lot more advanced quality products.

So maybe that can be the explanation.

So, so I mean I think you mentioned two different logics.

Let me see if I decompose. One logic is you might want to call measurement error.

You did not adequately control for inflation and you did not adequately control for quality improvements.

So that means that we actually made a mistake in our growth at least six.

And maybe the world grew much more, but it was poorly measured. So one potential story is measurement error.

Are you okay? I accept that I am ignorant of the direction of the measurement error.

But you're saying one dimension is measurement error, another dimension which some people have argued about the US when the US see.

Right, right now the question is how the [INAUDIBLE] is regress growing so fast?

But for a long time, the US was not growing so fast after the global financial crisis.

And then there was this whole story of saying, yeah, but we are not counting all the things that are free.

The, the how do you call it a free move?

You know that the, you know, you, you Google for free.

You you use you WhatsApp for free, you Facebook for free.

And where is that? No, it's generating welfare and generating.

Well some people think it's generating suicides but that's a different story there.

So where does that okay. Uh and then and we're definitely abstracting from, from that story.

But the he came and I personally if you took away my ability to Google and these days my ability to charge people, I would feel much, much worse.

And so maybe, maybe we should be happy that you don't need as much money as before to generate the same level of welfare.

But still, the question is, why are we not making more as much money as these other guys and why are they being able?

So you see, it changes. Maybe the.

How sad the story is. But it doesn't change the fundamental parameters of the story.

But these are these are great questions. We're past your bedtime.

Thank you. I, I hope to see you along on Tuesday.

Thank you. I.

Got no problems with. The guy like.

You know what I'm talking about.

So I don't know. Oh, yeah.

Oh, yeah, he's right there. Um, I guess it's.

Just an extension. Yeah.

Yeah. If it's like anybody else. Like he felt like he.

Helped me. Like, you know, the worst of the worst person.

Or something. Like that.

Saleswoman. Yeah. I don't know if this represents more because they're very invested in the best interests.

I feel like there are a lot of reasons why. I like the feeling.

Uh. You know, that's why.

I say. Oh, I.

Think we're doing. Some really wonderful things for.

Us. Did you do the former?

Yeah. I mean, I guess. Oh. Yeah.

Oh. Yeah, I forgot about.

That every Friday. Yeah. So I'm going to go to somebody because of that.

Oh, yeah. That's how it happened. So I mean, I think that, you know, I don't know, I guess I don't.

Know if you guys know each other. It's it's nice to meet you.

I like most of the time.

Okay. Yeah. This is my current Bible, which is so funny that everyone is the same guy.

That's. Exactly.

Right. Yeah, that's that's about that. Yeah.

Yeah. How about.

I say something like.

That. Yeah, yeah. Yeah yeah yeah.

Yeah, yeah. Yeah.

All right. But. I just, I think.

I hope. You.

Have. I know that's not a lot of.

Fun, anyway. Yeah. What do you think?

Is going on. Here.

Uh, I think you.

