[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Officers. I think it's.

Very possible. That this was meant to be a preparation.

For the vacuum. So. You wouldn't be looking.

Oh. That's a good thing.

But it's okay. It can't be. So don't worry about that.

Oh, and when it comes to protection, maybe that's kind of taken over often.

So that's the word. For word.

What do you think about that? What do you think?

I think it's fine. Yeah. So don't worry.

I mean, you could say. Like saying to which one?

He said it was, um.

I think it just took long. For.

I think I was just reading through the website. Yeah.

So there was some regression. And then I worked with Treacher.

And I kind of looked on the website.

It's the same, but, uh. And.

Yeah, I think that was the one that I was searching for.

So I just use the restroom. But the men's.

I. Is there any harm to the.

Experience here? I couldn't bear to face that.

That's an order. I think that's okay.

That's beautiful. Thank you.

But. We said that we should replicate it.

Yeah, yeah. I just up. Sure.

Yeah. Okay. Just look at my mouth.

She was late. How long do you think it takes?

315. So? She.

I think you. I.

Do. That but also.

Okay, so maybe we can get started.

Uh, just as a reminder, this, uh, session, if it is not that we get it, we will have, uh, lecture on Tuesday next week.

On Tuesday, we have, uh, another review session. Uh, and then on Friday, we don't have class either.

So we will have only one lecture next week on Tuesday.

Okay. That's the schedule we, we have as of now.

Um, so in the meantime, uh,

we wanted to take time to review some of the material that a recorder has introduced a this week and the material that you also watch on the,

uh, a pre class videos that, that we assigned to you.

Okay. So the structure for today is pretty much this.

First a problem set one grades are already posted.

So in case you have any comment please let us know.

And feel free to come up to office hours and we can discuss any thought that you may have.

A congratulations for finishing PC2.

I this was the longest so we.

Yeah, you should not expect to work more than that. You already it worked a the next problem set are going to be group problem sets.

So. So I hope that you the average. Yeah the uh division of work uh and then a remember that we host office hours every Monday and Friday.

We might change this so we can a meet with groups.

A ideally I think is going to be on Mondays.

Uh, so we can monitor your progress in your projects.

A groups should be ready by now.

So if, if that is not the case and if you don't have group please make sure you join one A otherwise we'll try to,

uh allocate people a or merge some groups that are more um please.

If you do so update the spreadsheet accordingly.

Okay. So these are the announcements that we have for today.

Uh, now let us dive into the review session. So first we're going to review growth the Gnostics.

This is just the roadmap that we have presented you before.

And this is why growth well we know that growth is important even as a small bit of growth matters in the long run.

So that's why we are concerned with growth about growth.

So then we introduce here we pose the question okay what is growth about.

Um there were some answers that were incomplete or unsatisfactory.

And most of the hints not just to think that there was something about technology, but we didn't clearly understand what technology was about.

So that's why we introduce economic complexity. That's a theory of technology.

And then a we introduce how technology is diffuse and why it is sticky.

And somehow and sometimes it's difficult to to accumulate.

Right. And then we, we we also added up another layer of, of, of complexity which is public goods and the key role that they have.

Um, again, with the analogy of the letters, A, you might have a lot of works, a lot of consonants.

Imagine. Right. But if you don't have vowels, you might be unable to form a different word unless it's Polish.

Uh, as Ricardo suggested. Right then a we also introduce green growth.

So this change in a challenge that the world has,

and how your country might contribute and might insert in that spectrum of opportunities that a green growth is going to generate.

Right. Uh, and agglomeration and remoteness that also can act as sort of constraints depending on the case that you studied.

A so then we move to great white growth diagnostics and then testing constraints.

That is what we're going to focus on today. Uh, so a the subject here is the country.

This is fundamental. It is not growth. So remember the analogy.

We're trying to think as medical practitioners know that not as medical researchers.

And we assume that as policymakers. We have to make decisions on the best available information that we have.

Um, in that regard, we propose growth agnostic to that method to iterate over different evidence and different

questions that might lead you to this thing that we call the binding constraint.

We will review that on detail. But remember this is all about medicine.

Not not biology. And sometimes if you're in a in a country A, you might need to take decisions.

And if if a patient if you were a physician, if a patient comes to you to your, uh, office and says, okay,

you have a cold, you cannot say, okay, let me run and asked, hey, do you want to be in the control room or near.

And then I will come back to you, uh, in, I don't know, in two years, and I can tell you what your disease was.

That is not the idea, right? Uh, so that's kind of the philosophy that we want to convey here.

A so we highlighted the role of input complementarity, which is something that is not evident out there in the mainstream.

A way in which a policy making is, is is thought about.

So the claim is basically that you run out of some inputs before you run out of others, and the shortest relative supply becomes binding.

We will review that concept with some examples. But that's the intuition.

And we have to focus on symptoms again. This analogy with medical practice.

The idea is that a you observed I don't know, fever.

Fever might be related to many diseases. So the idea is that you have a collection of symptoms that make sense in order to diagnose this property.

And in order to do that, you might need some tests. Right.

Uh, and then we talked about the reform agenda.

We argue that we should focus on factors in the supply chain instead of a long list of reforms.

Okay. Uh, we will review the versions of the group diagnostic theory.

But before I move on, I just wanted to check if there are any doubts about anything I've mentioned here so far.

Are we good to go? It's good.

Okay. Ideally, uh, and if you have questions, please feel free to interrupt me whenever.

Okay. I want this to be more, uh, sort of a conversation rather than, uh.

Anything else? So why are we talking about growth diagnostics?

So what is, uh, the main problem, if you have to summarize.

Sorry. Before. Before going into the next. The next point. Sure.

Um, why? To focus only on the supply side.

I mean, we know that the framework explains that both supply and demand should be an important issue here.

But why? To focus only on the supply side.

Why? To sort of level side. The demand side. Sure. That's an excellent question.

A I will lead you straight that with an example in a subsequent slide.

A we do not think that demand is not important, but a I will explain why supply side is what we focus on.

Okay. A but before we start with this, what is the main issue with with the conventional approach to to policy reform.

Right. I mean, what is the the key takeaways that you, I mean, uh, got after watching the free glasses videos.

Which I think for me was the fact that.

To change something, we don't need more and more reforms, because I think the example from the Washington Consensus in seeing how, um,

basically many things were important, some countries with the assumption that that will help to accelerate growth, that didn't work.

So it really is not always about just reforming or putting more constraints on countries.

Yeah, that's precisely the point. So let us define, uh, broadly sort of important things.

Uh, we do not prioritize any of them. And then we start doing as much as we can in any of these areas.

So we can, uh, ideally develop.

That is pretty much the conventional approach. Uh, and this is how ideas have changed over time.

Right. So. So for instance, if you ask people in the 60s, okay, so what governments should do and then, you know, government plays a central role.

It acts as the driving force behind development.

Uh, but if you go to 82, no, you know what?

It is the main obstacle to development. And I don't know if you go to, uh, core in capital.

So if the AI is to be avoided, but government borrowing is acceptable and preferably from foreign sources,

but here government borrowing is to be avoided if the I was encouraged.

So this is paradigms a change, right.

And the way in which we approach uh development,

thanks to be conditioned by this or has been conditioned by this same likewise for trade and um for development assistance.

Right. So, uh, this is to the point that Mitchell makes.

So this is the, the, the first version of the Washington Consensus, right.

So the the theory of change was basically, okay,

if you get to implement these things and then you improve some of these indicators, then you should grow, right?

You should grow. You should develop. Uh, and that was pretty much what people tried in the 80s, a late 70s.

A it didn't appear to work.

Some people said that it you work in Chile.

I don't know, I would say that there are more ehm, there are many ehm, peculiarities and many nuances that are missing from from that approach.

Eh. But typically this standard approach derived into, I don't know, a social, uh, resistance.

Right. So this is, I don't know, a picture from Argentina. I think this was in 2016.

But this happened again in Nigeria last year.

And in fact, I think, I think a couple of years ago.

So this is something that we constantly have seen a over the years, right.

This is the paper that Ricardo discussed in class, uh, and it basically says, okay, let's let's define a growth accelerations.

Right. And then he, he took first all growth episodes and then only sustained growth episodes.

And then let's try to see how many of those episodes are accompanied by some of these things.

So economic liberalization, political regime change, external shocks.

And then they a basically a calculated this, uh, proportion.

Right. And then the, the opposite. So how many of these instances are followed by growth accelerations.

The takeaway is so growth economic liberalization do not appear to be relevant either for growth episodes A or when it happens

it doesn't necessarily either growth acceleration A for either all growth episodes or only sustained growth episodes.

So there might be something missing in this approach.

Maybe it's not about getting just the laundry list and doing as many things as we can.

Some people said, okay, maybe we should add more things to the list. Maybe the list is not comprehensive enough.

And then we went from then kind of ten things that a the consensus recommended to a 20.

So I know we also have to think about corporate governance.

We also have to think about anti-corruption, labor markets, a trade financial codes, a capital account opening and so forth.

Right. So let's add more dimensions. But in essence, the philosophy is still the same, right?

Uh, and this is prevailing to, to this very date.

I mean, probably not in this explicit form, but if you take, um, any article for it and any of you are familiar with article forth.

Okay, that that might be a good source of information for, for you and your country projects.

Article fourth are the, uh, the assessment that the IMF does on different countries.

When he has a operations. So typically we do define a set of a criteria here that a are supposed to be important.

Right. And some targets. Um okay.

Did you meet it or not. And here is like okay.

Again the assumption here is that regardless of the area, the more that you do, the better that is.

That is the idea. The more that you do in any of these area, the better.

A and it's not different here either. So if you take the the doing business pretty much is okay.

How do I get these indicators. How do I get as many of these indicators to improve.

Right. That is a often the approach that many countries follow.

A and again it doesn't seem to work.

So just to to make the point we have these a very broad list of, of reforms a that have been a I don't know.

Yeah. They've, they've been thought as the solution to, to, to a different problems of different countries.

And it's like trying to fit everyone in the same suit. Right.

So that's precisely what we want to uh, the question.

So in order to do that we posed the method of government.

So growth agnostics focus on binding constraints a any idea of how to think intuitively a about the binding constraint.

But, I mean, you could. Yeah, you could use the metaphor of a barrel.

Mhm. But, uh, there's also the cake. The cake.

Okay. How many different ingredients. And you want to make a big cake.

But their proportion. So for each pound of flour you need five eggs.

So if you only have four eggs. So the binding constraint but you only have 800g of flour.

That's the binding constraint.

So that there's a proportion between inputs and whichever is the one that makes sure you can keep proportions of the binding constraint.

That's pretty much the essence. And I'm glad that you you're able to turn the analogy into another realm, the bakery.

Um, so if I may add something real quick. So the cake analogy is pretty good.

But um, in the cake analogy, nothing bad happens if you keep buying ingredients that are not the binding ingredient.

I mean, you might end up with, uh, I don't know, I probably instead of a cake or.

Yeah, yeah, maybe it doesn't taste as well, but but um, in growth diagnostics, uh, we think that depending on the input and depending on the economy,

sometimes if you improve in a dimension that is not the binding constraint,

you may increase demand for the binding constraint and make it even more binding.

And depending on the elasticities, this may decrease the overall, um, efficiency of the system and the overall output.

So think of, let's say, uh, country where um, there is one industry that is very important.

And to work in that industry you have to go through the highway.

Um, now let's say that transport is the binding constraint.

If you improve something that makes like small businesses, uh, more, um, profitable, then you will increase congestion even more.

And that if that creates problems for the specific, uh, you know, major industry of the country,

then, uh, improving, you know, they that is not the binding one might have overall negative effects.

But, you know, this is, uh, just to say that you have to be thinking always about the second best and how the distortions interact between each other.

Um, because, you know, this can get very complex.

But at the core of it is this idea of complete complementarity, right?

What you highlighted. Uh, so we argue that reform is best focused on largest direct effects.

We will see that. What what that means, uh, and then we propose that we can think about the determinants of growth,

uh, using this decision trees in order to, uh, classify or identify diagnostic signals.

Okay. So a this was a pretty much what we discussed in class A, we have a question.

We have the differential diagnosis.

A we I will provide some guidance on how you move from questions and diagnosis that is symptoms to syndrome and then to your therapeutics.

A and this is just the four tests that that we studied.

And we will review a. But basically growth diagnostics is also an appendix to of economic complexity theory.

Or it might be uh an appendix to uh economic complexity theory.

So again, in complementarity there are public goods.

There is some room for high bandwidth policy. And a this might a guide how you choose your problem.

Right. A in Miami also uh philosophy of work in which A we believe that not a one size fits all.

A again, we don't expect to fit everyone in the same suit and policy.

A and I re-emphasize this point as medical work a instead of biology.

It has also some some art. There are not definite answers.

That is why a what we're trying to convey is the method.

But it's not like you're going to Google in some way or go into the macro data set and say,

okay, give me the shadow price for this, and then you get it.

No, you have to be created about how to get some things.

Okay. Uh, good.

So just as a recap, what does production require a lot of things in.

But people write a copy to read.

It also requires a public goods that are highly specific.

Uh, so we have to always keep this in mind.

And back to the barrel analogy. So here is how a look at a work of a substitute.

Looks like right. So we just stack things and add more.

So the the higher this this is the better a.

And so for it doesn't matter if a I don't know macro stability is very thin as long as a finance is it has a lot of width right.

So that's that's that interpretation of the world.

And this is the one that that that we a argue that should be more appropriate.

That is it doesn't matter how much you work here in human capital, if you don't work in infrastructure you will just spend a valuable resources.

Right. Okay. So you already got this.

Uh, so yeah, you ideally want to cover the whole in infrastructure.

And then another thing and this is also an important point.

This might be an iterative process. So once you solve one of the issues another issue might become binding.

Uh you want to get some. Yeah. So in this uh example.

Once you fix infrastructure, whatever that means uh, then macro stability becomes binding.

But what? But it's because it's just the next level.

But what if, uh, macro stability, human capital and low taxes are sort of all bunched at the same height?

Like, how do you think that would change the way in which you think about policy in general?

Like, we you know, you can comment. How will that change the way you identify what's binding?

How would that change the way you design policy? Juan Pablo.

I don't know if this is the correct answer, but I think one question that I have is like, how would you know?

How complementary are the inputs among each other?

So like as you were saying, that you fix infrastructure,

but then how do you know how much you have to fix my predictability in order to know it's talking about,

you know, like prevent the I constraint that change through the next one.

So great. So now we have now we have three questions on the floor.

I have here. Uh, actually this is also a question.

Uh, I don't know if my understanding is correct.

Um, on the left. Baradun, is that you focus on are you indexed the priority by, for example, you focus on, uh, low social conflict,

and then after you build that, you add the infrastructure as your next target and then you grow your growth.

Right. And also so in the barrel example they are all substitutes.

So for example, let's say um you destroy half of your infrastructure.

It wouldn't matter as long as you improve finance.

Like if you double finance and half infrastructure, then the overall size of the barrel would be the same.

And that's the logic of growth regressions.

Like if if everything has a beta and you know you have less of something, you can compensate with something else.

And another thing is that the order doesn't matter. Okay. So it just I mean, we have both finance here and what the government says is just the same.

Yeah. So so that's a that's why we think it's problematic. That's why we think the world doesn't look like the left barrel.

Uh, yeah. Because in the right barrels, like you, you focus on all the criterias and then you build them at the same time.

Correct. So in the left barrel, you can do whatever you want and it will create growth as long as what you do is positive.

So if you if you improve education things will grow.

If you improve improve your macro stability even though it might already be very well, very good, then you still get growth.

So so everything has a bang for buck. But that's not what we see in reality.

We see that places, uh, do things that in, you know, you would expect lead to growth.

And they don't have a big bang for money. So we still have three questions.

So time to clear one. Um, so if those three constraints are all binding all together, maybe we will see sensitivity towards like downwards shock.

So if it goes down we will see some output changing significantly.

But you wouldn't go up to like the output wouldn't go up too much.

You could see increase maybe. But this is how we do it. And that's how we use that like correlation.

And maybe we also look at other like qualitative like observations like that like camel versus people arguments.

And that's where we can get the clues about. But these are like all like family constraints.

Yeah. Exactly. So in that case we would see evidence in the first test.

So quantities would be pretty low for the three of them.

If they are, three of them are binding because they're sort of like at the same height.

Uh, then we would also see evidence in test three and four, because we see agents less intensive in them being more prevalent.

And that's third. And then for the fourth one, we would see agents try to overcome them somehow, somehow,

but we may not see a big bang for buck if we run regressions and see like changes and changes,

which is the second test, uh, because you would have to improve the three of them to see, uh, to see results from any of them big ones.

But if you look at the direction of the stickiness, like maybe you shouldn't see the output going down if,

if, uh, one of them goes down because they're like they are binding constraints.

If they go down. Yeah, if they go down, then yes, because they would stop being at the same height.

So it would be the one that went down would become the binding one and the other two would have slack.

Yeah. So in that case yes. So, so, so that that answers the question of how, how do we how would that change the testing.

But it doesn't answer the question of what do we do about it.

Like how how do you think about policy in a world where many things might be either binding together or very close to each other?

So the distances are so small that if you can prove something, that something becomes binding, right, right afterwards,

like in that, in that scenario, how you think things will change and think, think of the policy public goods class.

Think of how it ended. Maybe there is a, um.

If I really took too much finishes.

So maybe there is, uh, maybe we can find this kind of public goods that cuts across all three that can influence them.

Or, like. Okay, easy answer is work on all three at the same time.

So that that would be in line with, um, high bandwidth policy making hypothesis that essentially like when things become too complex,

if we're not talking about six inputs,

but we're talking about something more complex, like 200 or 2000 different types of public goods,

then you need to have a mechanism to sort through that information.

If you may have market failures in in many places and you don't know ex-ante which one is more important,

then you need to have a mechanism that can have a high bandwidth to to absorb all of that information and do something.

So it becomes a more difficult issue. Um, because there might be many things that you have to be working on at the time.

And if you don't have the mechanism that is good at identifying those, then you're screwed.

And so you will see, like, I don't know if countries like Japan have these,

uh, it's not like the messenger device, but it's it's something close to it.

And you have these sectorial tables for hundreds of sectors, very tiny sectors, or, you know, maybe a thousand sectors.

And it's just like, maybe for us, for a country that's beginning to do this, it will be hard to do it for one input.

But Japan has managed to do it for hundreds, and it's a matter of creating that capability and maintaining.

Yeah, I would, I would, uh, summarize the punchline as you don't have to know the answer to xanthan.

Uh, as a policy maker, you want to put in place mechanisms that allow the system to review the information.

That is basically what you're missing. Okay. The other question.

Yeah, like like I, I have a question, like in practical terms, how you proceed to do these leases.

Because like I believe in theory, like I believe like you may have like a little of something like approval or something,

but if you don't have like a minimal level of other things, that is like Supreme Court,

like for example, like where you go that you can improve education for the people that are afraid to go to the streets because there's a lot of crime,

like nothing is going to happen. Right. So that could be a binding constraint.

But like my point is like in practice, how would you know which are the inputs.

Are those like the the Washington Consensus like the inputs.

And how do you know how much? It's it's very complicated process.

Yeah. It's like that's a lot of assumptions right. Yeah. So so initially you might think of it as like you do a very long report.

You spend like years thinking about it, but that's too little.

Like I mean what we do is we work on a country for two years and we do the first step, but then it has to be a process.

And it's an iterative process and it's an evolving process and the constraints change and so on.

So you need someone on the ground. It's not like you hire McKinsey or you hire the growth lab and your problem is done.

Maybe we help you solve the first one and I in and give you a theory as to how to think about in the future,

but it has to be someone's 9 to 5 job there.

It needs to be like, uh, an organization, an institution whose job is to do this and maybe many of them for different sectors and so on.

But like a big one to help you prioritize, uh, in high level.

But it's, um, depends on the country. I would, I would say that here's where theory might be useful.

I mean, if you take the, uh, decision tree, the growth thing that's the decision tree is an attempt to explain the question.

Right. So you started with a question and you come up with a model. So this is what the what potentially explains this.

And then you start going down. Right. And I will show maybe some some examples that might help illustrate that.

But pretty much that's the intuition. So the first a in the first version of the diagnostic tree A consider a neoclassical a production function.

So the structure that it had relied on those assumptions, right.

And on those factors and try to understand what might constrain any of those factors.

A the 2.0 version extends that to complexity, and then it tries to incorporate some issues that were not captured by the first one.

But this is kind of an iterative process in in mind.

It might be very specific to Claudia, but I guess sort of digging into the points that have been made before from the conceptual point of view,

from the theory point of view, and also from the methodology point of view, a theory of complexity and complementarity,

which is basically the theory of growth that we are looking at this class, um, in actual life and also theory,

you don't have full substitutes and you have something complementarities what you have is a lot of interactions.

So I guess our curiosity is why we don't see that kind of interest.

We're not looking at the factor. All those all factors are proportional.

Um. It must be the interactions between different bundles of factors which actually may cause growth in different directions or, or, or quantities.

But I don't see that. I think I think that's sort of our curiosity.

Why is that not deflected complexity and complementarity has to deal with that.

When is that within the theory? I need to reflect this.

So I'll give a quick answer. So in the interactions are there.

And theoretically you have to always be thinking on them.

The the process is so complex and like context dependent that when the paper was originally written, it was a mind book,

not a handbook, because it's just a way of thinking in like we don't have the information to tell you.

And because we don't have the information to tell you about the all the complementarities, what do we tell you is where not to look at.

So the the method of world diagnostics is going to tell you where not to look at.

So you you start with a world in which you have.

100 different potential explanations, and all of them are theoretically nested within the same diagnostic tree.

And then so in because you're going from top to bottom,

what you're doing is discarding branches as you go down so that you make one question and you discover if it's right or left,

and if you if it's right, you're going to forget completely all the questions on the left.

And then you keep going and you keep going and you're going to be discarding.

Potential explanations based on the symptoms that you observe.

So because you cannot observe the, the, the relationships, the complementarities, but you can observe it's like the phenotypic approach.

So you're observing the symptoms and you're discarding potential explanations based on where the symptoms are not.

Okay. Um, and then uh, and you're going to be going from, from the, from the wide to the narrow.

Uh, and you may never reach the final point,

but you are going to have a clear assessment of where the issue lies and and how you should prioritize, uh, the further research and policy.

Um, I don't know if that if that answers your question, but, like, it's it's.

It's it's, uh, maybe you end up halfway with, like, a medium sized bucket of an explanation,

and then you're going to throw everything at that medium sized bucket without knowing where in the bucket is the problem.

But that's where you where you reach that.

You couldn't do better than that, but you still discarded a lot of places where you're not going to devote resources.

I mean, uh, it is certainly, uh, there are many interactions that we might be unable to capture.

Um, yet, uh, sometimes this process and this method, as the year might just mention,

it's not about trying to prove things, but instead about disproving others.

Right? We're not to focus our attention. So just keep that in your mind.

I will skip this for the sake of time. I will go to the to the tree.

So this was the neoclassical view of the world, right?

So we have so, uh, low levels with private investment.

So a what might explain that. And then as you said, if this is right, then I forget about this a or I mean and vice versa.

Right. And this is just, uh, a mapping of the potential explanations that might exist for this problem.

Right. This is another version which is a to Bono.

Right. Uh, and again, we have more things here. So we have, uh, technology there.

We have public goods here. A we have ability to borrow to tax effectiveness of those public goods.

A a complexity here. Uh, right.

And the interacting with the rest of the world here. And so this is another way in which you can think about the world.

A I will also present another alternative that we use for the project that kind of combines both approaches.

Uh, so we have here, uh, this was the problem that we came in set up, and I will talk about it briefly later.

And then we have a bunch of things that we want to explain. Right.

And we started tested testing each of them.

So worst case scenario, this framework gives you an systematic and ordered way in which you can get rid of things.

And that might be useful, uh, for prioritization even if you don't buy the whole story.

Okay, just as a side comment, a this is another a three.

I mean, you could go deep as you want. This is for public goods, right?

So there is not such a thing as that as the right tree we want that says you having the right tree a we,

we will then try to push you into use the available a pool of things that that

is out there and trying to fit it to the context that you're working on.

Right. So this is for public goods and this might be some of a, some things a that that might go into it.

And there might be for causes, a there might be other instances for human capital that we will see and, and so forth.

Right. I mean, there are a several examples that sorry, this is not a high definition,

but this is a decision tree for coordination failures in a, in technology in a set.

Again. So same thing. So do we go a right or go left a.

So here can I say right can grow by expanding existing experts in this country mainly exports oil and oil reserves are depleted are fading out.

So no. Right. And then is it easy to diversify.

Are you well positioned in the product space? No.

Then you continue going it down right. So this is the kind of approach that we want you to follow, right?

A and so forth. Until you get here to this, uh, um, branch the final one.

Uh, okay. So how do we test constrain?

Any one of you remembers what you have done? Oh, sorry.

I had a quick question. Before we go to the next question, in terms of the trees.

Uh huh. I guess the question is, how do you make sure your tree is exhaustive?

Because there is so many different factors which are possible. And then looking at the Azerbaijan example,

like it could be like some sort of internal conflict that's causing the kind of inability to kind of grow in a certain way.

How do you kind of make sure that your tree doesn't miss out on key branches?

So, um, again, this might be context specific.

And I remember, for instance, last year we had a project on DRC.

And as some of you might know, DRC a conflict is that it's a big thing.

So security was part of the tree that they developed like something related to conflict and how security constraints, a growth and output, etc.

So again, this is up to you guys and a using the method to try to test symptoms and come up with an answer.

If this is relevant, it will show up in many places right now.

But but you have to come up with uh, causal mechanism like a theoretical castle mechanism, because you have to design the branch in a certain way.

And so in the case of the DRC, for example, the conflict was more in the east, where all the minerals are.

So it was a constraint on mining, for example, or it was a constraint on FDI, or it was a constraint on, on taxing whatever got produced.

So it was a fiscal problem. Uh, and so and you also had to spend on the military.

So you need to think about how these things interact, uh,

and put it into a theory that fits well within your tree so that the tree is

all about figuring out what theoretical model can matter for your context.

And then the empirical is just about going through the tree. But the a lot of the work is, you know, understanding how theoretically this could work.

Any changes as you or so. Um, my question is somehow related to the interaction she mentioned before.

Mhm. Um, like, is it possible that in the tree somehow you find yourself looping?

Um, because that is something that is a constraint from for something else.

And somehow you need to branch to that part and then keep going.

Like how do you, um, materialize that in also in terms of um, analysis diagnostic, how do you,

I don't know, come up with some kind of, um, theoretical solution for that very question.

Do you have some comments? I have some, so it was in one of the examples that happened.

So the first tree was very, uh, beautiful because they didn't have a simple.

Yeah, it was simple. It was very easy to understand because it didn't have any of any loops.

Um, but in the second tree we were like, okay, you know, the world is more complex.

There's a lot of loops, there's a lot of interactions. Maybe it's more complicated.

The problem with the second tree is that it's less easy to use.

It's very, you know, it's not very, uh, intuitive, uh, and it doesn't give you a lot of, uh, answers as to where to start and where to end.

So you just end up testing everything. Uh, and it's hard to discard branches, which is what makes this like, uh,

I don't it makes it easier when you can discard branches, but when you have loops, it's hard.

But, yeah, it can happen. Uh, thanks for your question. I think that's the sort of questions that we want you to ask.

A so the assumption here is that all of these things are mutually exclusive, right?

So if you are here you cannot be here and vice versa.

So it might happen. Uh, we can try to capture that in, uh, less intuitive way.

We can reach our mid-ground somewhere, eh?

But yeah, these things might occur. But again, a and then, uh, maybe jump into something that I'm going to see, we're going to see later.

But remember the Bayesian thing. Right. So you have two hypotheses.

A and you might update your priors given whatever because it might be that one one thing.

So here we had an example I think so I don't know human capital might I also I don't know affect increase access to to finance.

Right. So you don't know if these things are like this or if this is like this or this is like this, right?

Eh. But ideally, the tests and the questions that you pose will help you disentangle that node.

And if if not, well, it would be completely valid if you cannot tell them apart.

Like these two things appear to be very important because they keep showing up on in all the tests that I do,

I exactly cannot pinpoint what is the mechanism that relates them together.

Uh, good. So, uh. Yeah.

Spoiler. So what are the four tests that we have discussed so far?

The price. Test price. Okay. That's one. What about the animals?

Anyone remembers the animals? Each one of those are easy for some people.

And camels and the other? Yes. But what does it mean?

I don't know. I guess I just wanted to to have done in my neighborhood.

What is the other. What is the other animal? Huh?

Because they're not from the first class.

Second class session? Uh, no. Before he was, he was again.

He was right. And then, uh, what is the third one?

German briefly introduce it. Is about if you change something, right?

No, maybe. If you, uh, change the constraint, you should see it changes in part.

Changes in changes. So here they are, right?

If I go and train constraint is binding,

then the shadow price of the constraint should be hide movements in the constraint should produce significant movements in the objective function.

It might be GDP, it may be other things. Camels and hippos.

Agents less intensive in that constraint should be more likely to survive and try and vice versa.

And I was in the desert. Agents in the economy should be attempting to overcome or bypass the constraint.

So briefly there is the shadow price, right.

So a high shadow price indicates relative scarcity of the factor.

Right. The shadow price test complements measuring scarcity by quantity.

And this is a very important point since low availability can be a signal of either lose those who buy or low demand.

Right. So. This is something that we keep seeing every year and every year.

So people jump to conclusions just by observing loved ones.

I don't know. Educational attainment is low, human capital is different.

Or I don't know. Embezzlement is too low. Finance is a concern.

First thing I would say there. Whenever you make a claim of anything, be lower.

High. You have to make clear what your benchmarks show.

That is where beer selection becomes important, right? And second thing, even if it's low, right.

You may want to ask yourself, is this because it's in low supply or in low demand?

Okay. Great.

So a yeah. So basically here is the example.

Some of you might have already seen this, but this is how having low demand looks like.

Right. Look that this is the same quantity for both right.

In this case we have a low quantity and a low price.

In this case we have a low quantity but a very high price. So people would be willing to demand the love of it,

but it is not available in the economy in this case is you just people that

I mean firms agents in the economy do not demand this for any given reason.

A so we tend to focus on these things because in principle, these are the ones that could enable like road.

Right. If you are to. Chief, I don't know that the slope of this curve, you might observe a huge thing happening here.

Right here. It might be more it related to preferences sometimes in the economy or is low prices.

Is that okay if you are to shift this I don't know maybe a something happened that a yeah that the chief demand is up then it might increase.

But in principle this is our area of focus okay.

So quantities can be low again because they are in low demand.

Only those who play A don't be deceived by this. So be careful with your analysis.

Do not jump to conclusions only by observing low quantities.

This is super important A and is something that Ricardo tends to be picky about it.

So when you're presenting your your final project a be mindful of this.

Uh, so changes in changes very briefly a view as you mentioned,

if something is binding a then relaxations of the constraints should produce substantial changes.

Right. So if it is GDP then we should observe that a I don't know.

Let's imagine that A here a exchange rate is is is a binding constraint.

So how would you test that. So for instance we did that for a survey. Again a we thought no maybe the real exchange rate is super.

Appreciate it. A what would expect what would you expect if there is a massive depreciation.

What would you expect for the non non oil experts.

In that case. If the exchange rate was a binding constraint.

They would increase, right? You would expect that if the fact is that you're not competitive because now you're exchange rate is super appreciated,

then a massive depreciation will make you super competitive.

And then if the exchange rate was a problem, then would you would export.

Right. Well that that didn't happen. So in this case it was not a value constraint.

We can discuss that example later. Maybe uh, this is Camilla and he was or more formally agents, less incentive,

less intensive in the binding constraint should be more likely to drive and vice versa.

So this just says that if transportation is an issue, then firms that rely less in transport maybe,

I don't know, imagine that they some firms or some sectors are located by by the sea or by the coast.

And then they don't have to be that way. They might be able to drive.

They do not have to go to to poor roads, a bad infrastructure in and so forth.

Right. Uh, and then a high percentage this or this is that agents in the economy should be attempting to overcome or bypass the constraint.

A and then here I just wanted to remind you the Saki case in Japan.

So if, for example, if firms are investing heavily in transfer transportation for their workers,

this might be a signal that transportation is a constraint to production.

That is what happened in this case. And what would you what we observed there is that we have the firm scatter in different a,

a mid sized level a firms instead of a beak a production plan.

Right. Again they're trying to bypass transportation.

But okay. So how would the assess that. So this is the conceptual framework of this these four things shadow price and why shadow okay.

Some things might not have explicitly a price. So what is the price of not having available water or not having available electricity.

Right. Maybe you don't have a formal price for that.

Imagine that I don't know a utilities have price caps so the price is not informative.

But maybe if people invest a lot of in water pumping of if people invest a lot in generators, that is the real price of that thing.

Right? So a that here's where you have to be creative about how to think about the price of the constraint that you were you are introducing.

Right. Uh, so we have these four tests, but we also went through these.

Right. So we have two types of evidence and conditions.

So we might think that let's say a collective knowhow is a mining constrain or savings is a binding constraint.

Right. So what would we do. We would start by trying to collate some data and evidence for, for this.

Right. And then we could have sufficient conditions.

Right. Which said that if this happens then X is a binding constraint or necessary conditions

that says basically if X is a binding constraint that these other things happen,

right? And in general, what tends to happen is that we almost never find evidence that would fit the category of sufficient condition.

So there is not such a thing like, okay, I run a, uh, diagnostic test with these 2 or 3 things.

And this is the answer. A definitely a I'm coming back to the to what we previously discussed.

This is something similar about disproving things. So a method A, which allows you to get rid of things that might be just a noise.

Okay. But the key idea here and the text you can read later is this that Ricardo a explain.

So you one you have your priors right.

What is the probability of this factor being the binding constraint.

Right. And then what is the probability of observing this, this signal or this symptom given that this factor is the binding constraint.

Right. And then the probability of observing these signals in general.

So if the denominator is super big then you have to reassess this.

Right. And then this will be your updated prior to try to think about this when you're running test.

So what is the prior that you have and how do your priors change once you run the test okay.

So to this is very important because it's super important you never observe.

Of these probabilities. Not again, of course, but you have to make decisions based on them.

And what this means is that, for example, it's a very simple test with like I'm just seeing a line going up might completely change

your prior about something and you didn't have to do like a fancy regression or so,

like it's not a publishable paper, but it's still very useful information to wander through the world.

So yeah, the moral here is also try not to waste your time.

So be smart about the question you ask how you test them.

And I mean, if you get a sufficient condition that signals that something is not happening in a, then you're good to go, right?

So if you if you observe something that sorry, if you if you have necessary conditions that don't show up, don't show up.

You can try to discard that and move ahead with the next one.

So now these are the steps to formulate a good growth agnostic or the usual way we do it is like we start with the growth question.

So what is your growth question. Then we go down the diagnostics tree.

And maybe the ones that we provided in may be one that you design a.

And we formulate and test a comprehensive set of symptoms and binding constraints.

Okay. After and this pretty much again as medical practice.

So I have fever. Uh, I have a headache.

Um, I don't know, a collection of things. And then I might run some tests, some lab test, blood test, etc.

And then with all that information, we ideally want to post it a syndrome.

Okay. What is this syndrome? A I would go there, but you basically have to ask yourself why this is persistent.

Why this collection of symptoms A is in equilibrium basically okay.

So search for further testable implications of the syndrome.

And then you iterate three and four until you converge.

Okay, this is pretty much the process. Uh, and here's a syndrome.

Try to answer the question. Why is this constraint persisting?

Why is this an equilibrium? A syndrome should have enough description of the problem that you can have.

And a clear theory of change if the syndrome is not immediately actionable.

I don't know either. I know you push deeper and cultural problems might be associated.

We might have economic growth or political economic roots, um, or pivot toward second best.

Maybe. I don't know, my country is, but maybe my country's geography is not the best.

But that can be mitigated, right? We we have some evidence or some suggestions on how to overcome remoteness, for instance.

Uh, do you want to add something here with.

So the challenge is to put a narrative that poses a syndrome and links the symptoms observe and draws clear policy implications.

So again very a like a medical practice symptoms collection of symptoms syndrome.

Right. The general disease and why this is an equilibrium why this is persistent.

And sometimes when you get to the syndrome a it might be very ehm.

Yeah. It many times have to do with political economy dynamics.

So I don't know. Let's see. Last year I remember the case of if Garner, he had to do a lot with the political cycle.

So you would observe a. An unsustainable a depth a behavior a also compromised fiscal indicators.

But they were very tied to the political cycle. So when the elections came then they asked for more money, etc., etc.

So the political dynamic was a ambit in this whole problem.

Just as an example. Okay.

So how do you choose your growth question? So step two again this is the first first part.

And you will have to do that for problem set three eh.

So the idea is that you have to show that you have a good growth question.

Problem three you will have a preliminary question A and then the final right.

In the final assignment you will have your your definite A growth question that you will present when you're doing your project presentation.

Right. So your question is not just a sentence but the evidence that justifies it.

Your question is basically your first result.

So let's see in practice what types of questions are there and what type of evidence would we want to see.

So this is maybe a useful way to come up with a question you could ask.

For instance is growth adequate. Then you might say yes it is.

And then if it is, is it sustainable? Yes it is.

Is it inclusive? You could go here if you want a or.

No, it is not. Is it because of balance of payment issues is because of fiscal issues.

And we you could expand this here, right?

Uh or no it is not adequate and other similar country that are doing better.

And why is this place doing worse than that. That is just a a way in which you could you could structure it.

A again, you can customize this aim.

So steps to choose a question. Select poor countries.

This is super important. Describe the growth trajectory of your country.

Vis-a-vis the poor countries. Identify the threat to growth based on the growth trajectory.

Okay, and pose a growth question. These are the steps that you have to follow.

So select your countries. Uh would you can typically see countries that have similar income levels,

that have similar economic structures that have similar or no complexity values.

A they have similar population that share some, uh, I don't know, regional, uh, criteria.

You could also add some aspirational peers and ideally you add some aspirational peers to see, okay, what I would like my country to look like okay.

That is something that you, you have to consider. You can be as sophisticated as you want.

So for instance, some people just a I mean you can go and and see some charts.

This is how growth has evolved. This makes sense.

This, this this seems to be a good beer for for my country.

You could a I don't know, run some regressions and see you could also,

I don't know try to group them with a I don't know if some sort of algorithm a some people do

also I don't know principal component analysis and tries to get the most similar countries.

A your beers might change, but ideally you want to come up with a good criteria beer selection and then a you continue to do the rest.

So here uh, really quickly in the previous like two slides ago, depending on what the next one,

depending on what question you choose, your tests are going to be completely different.

Because if your objective is inclusive, then you have to test against inclusion.

If your objective is sustainability, you have to test against sustainability.

If your objective is, uh, I don't know, diversification, like growth at the extensive margin, you have to test against diversification.

Okay. So all of the most of the examples we've given you are on the first question, which is the most common one.

So why is growth not higher. Right. Um, but if you choose something else you have to design your test, uh, with that new objective function in mind.

Um, so here a just a quick review.

Your poor countries should have, should serve, uh, as a sort of collected synthetic counterfactual.

Uh, so comparison to beers helps expose what you neutral a what is what is unusual about your country in particular?

Uh, so yeah, each country, each a each question should have ideally different beers.

That might be the case or not. Uh, so we have in practice speaks about five beers.

So consider also looking for countries that yeah this is something that is relevant.

So you can a big contemporary countries.

Or you could say you know what my country looks like a China look in the 90s or how, you know, the US look like in the 70s.

There is also a criteria that you can use. Okay. And then as I mentioned, an aspirational beer is important.

What variables might be relevant for beer selection.

So GDP per capita, population export composition, historical ties, geography whatever you choose basically just justify it.

So if you make a case we trust your judgment.

So just just let us know what is your your process and how you got there.

If make sense a they you can use a spirit.

Here are some examples. So this is a for Thailand.

So a we ended up taking a little bit Nam Indonesia Philippines and Korea.

Right. This is just an example a.

And then you can I don't know be more sophisticated.

You can correlate MCP matrices. You can correlate densities.

You can do PCA a. Yeah I mean and and basically you you will have to describe the growth trajectory.

Right. A what does GDP per capita group look like across history and in current growth regime.

Is it high low stable volatile versus poor countries versus the world.

Right. Um, and are there factors that make growth look unsustainable?

Let's say, I don't know, sugar rush for natural resources bottlenecks in the structural transformation process, macroeconomic imbalances.

Uh, for more in complexity, I'll look a, um, basically, I don't know,

this is a case of Jordan, but probably this is this is so somewhat more relatable.

This is Nigeria. This is how exports grew.

This is how GDP per capita grew. Right.

So this is the typical case of sugar rush. So is this sustainable.

For instance this is a country that I question that you could boast.

This is China for instance. This is how the population pyramid looks like in 2020.

This is the population how the population pyramid will look in 2050.

How would this condition grow then with aging population?

Uh, you might ask if those growth rates are sustainable with these characteristics.

A this is the case of South Africa with, uh, increasing and rising a death rate here.

So. The fiscal side of of of this might be important and might condition and constrain growth.

Uh I'm some comments I will share run a I feel it will feel it feels short on time.

But remember green growth. How can you grow by helping the world decarbonize?

This is the important thing. And you might have opportunities in here of these strategies.

So you can use this to a yeah this is basically that how to incorporate remote.

This same is like use remoteness as the lens of your growth.

Question. If your country is remote a and how to grow in an economy with a limited produce space and how to succeed in the few industries available.

So basically everything that we have discussed so far a can go into your growth question, right?

A so what makes a good growth question?

Uh, here are some aspects I will let them for you to read a this is a table that might be useful.

Some examples of good and bad questions. And here a I just wanted to provide maybe a close with this example.

This is a the example of a survey again similar to Nigeria.

This is uh an oil exporting country. So you see they duplicate it.

They income per capita in less than a decade. Right.

But this is how their experts look like. And this is how their projected oil exports look like.

So if this was what allows them to get here, what will happen now.

Right. So if past growth has been driven by oil, and oil cannot drive growth in the long run, right.

Then for this project we posted this question how can I manage the transition in

declining revenues to create new growth drivers in non oil tradable activities?

That's an example of one of those projects. These are some questions from last year that you might want to take a look.

There will be in the presentation. And and uh just as a final tip, it is probably time to start getting to know a bit more about your country.

So try to read article four. It's a global and systematic country diagnostics report from the economy.

You can delete your unit, uh, previous growth diagnostics that you might find right.

Uh which are in campus learning campus. Yeah. And by the time of we end the course ideally.

