[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good morning everyone. What? Was your weekend?

No peace this weekend. I hope you have some rest. Uh, but it's not the only class we have.

Uh, I thought it was the case. There's a lot of homework.

They always do homework, so. Unfortunately. I know that a Ricardo fell short on time and yes, on the lecture on finance.

So we will be reviewing some of the material that he didn't cover.

Uh, hopefully we have time to a covered, uh, all that was missing.

Uh, but, uh, we also have a case that ideally we'll get to to do.

Great. So today's, uh. We're sorry.

We are in session. This is review session here. Uh, but we'll mainly going to finish Ricardo's lecture on finance.

That's very much what we have for today. And we want to review the things that, uh, he managed to get done.

Okay. So. Why don't we get started?

Great. So, uh, this is this is how this looks.

Remember, we have only one lecture done on Thursday.

Uh, it will be on human capital using the diagnostics framework.

Uh, and we will have two review sessions this week. A this one that is about finance.

And the Friday one is going to help you with problems.

The three problems at three will be posted a today in the afternoon.

So keep an eye on it. Uh, um, it is due on October A23.

Okay. So this is what we have for today.

As I said, we will pretty much finish what Ricardo was not able to cover on Friday.

Uh, and it is mostly about how to use the diagnostic tree on finance.

Okay. So this is these are the three things in the agenda.

And with that we can get started. So for those of you who made it to Friday's, uh, lecture, why finance might be problematic.

Well, what are some of the issues that that Ricardo, uh, brought to the table that my made finance problematic?

What about banks? What what do we know about about banks.

What was the first problem that he introduced? You have.

You look like you have an idea, Mohammed. Uh, actually, the, uh, problem is that, uh, they have a sort of bonhomie, including money,

so they can, uh, issue as as much money as they won't be, uh, fined $5,000.

Or finally, that becomes a problem because the, uh, the, uh, intellectual and the people, uh, agrees to a little collateral and,

uh, uh, and comes when, uh, depositors, they realize there won't be able the banks won't be able to return their money.

And historically, they don't care when the finally banks collapse.

Oh 34 okay, basically you're defining or you're describing a bank run.

A although regarding to introduce some two constraints that banks have to balance out in their operations, we will move there.

But before that, like what is the most essential problem that finance faces.

He introduce something called time inconsistency right.

So what is time inconsistency about. Does anyone remember that.

So I think is the fact that over time people tend to behave differently or alter the behavior.

So basically is that today you have um, incentives to promise everything.

Right? But when you get the money, your incentives might change, right?

So that might make it harder for or harder for finance market to develop.

Like if we lack institutions, that allows us to align incentives that might be problematic.

So it intermediation, you know,

banks just take money from a people that have agents that have excess capital and

allocate them to a agents that have ideas about how to make something profitable.

Right. And then there is time inconsistency.

The thing that we just described, whether a idea about a banking did Ricardo introduced that was very important.

What was the main business of the bank.

He I think he stated that at least 2 or 3 times during the lecture.

Some something about information. If you recall anything.

Mohammed. Actually events there.

Collect the information from, uh, about, uh, five people.

You got it all. Uh huh. Because, uh uh uh uh, private person be able to get permission about their behavior, uh, hold their investment in visitors.

Uh, this information is collected and reviewed.

So while he kept saying a multiple times is that banks are in the business of collecting private information about their customers, right.

So this is an information incentive process.

Um, there are some incentives to keep them private because you can exploit some benefits from that information.

Uh, I will provide an example of that ahead.

So he then going back to what you were mentioning or when you were describing the bank run.

So he introduced two constraints that bank have to have to comply with.

So one is liquidity. Does anyone remember what liquidity is about how quickly you can transform your assets into cash.

Yeah. More or less is that remember that he he gave this example I think with a with Matt and Marcel you were a bank and that was the other one.

So if, if I have an account with math, but I get a check and they want to move it to ourselves bank,

then a mad banks needs to have certain ability to turn this money into money into Marcel's bank, ideally at an exchange rate of one.

As Ricardo explained, right. So for this reason, banks will have some source of research that those are money that they do not emit.

Who is the institution that issued these money?

Well it is this is what we typically a call base money.

Some part of that base money is going to be reserves. And those reserves are the ones that might guarantee this liquidity.

So that was on one aspect. What was the second aspect.

The second constraint that he introduced. So was it.

Sorry. Solvency. Solvency?

Yes. So capitalization. Right? And what was about it?

It's about the ability of overall balance to be able to pay off the liability.

Yeah. Kind of. So remember that a bank basically takes long term loans, right?

It's sorry. It takes short term deposits. So anyone can come and knock on the door any day.

But you give long term loans. You give.

I don't know if you want to settle a plant or, I don't know, build a some buildings, etc. so it will take you time and it might be exposed to risk.

So you have very short term liabilities and long term assets.

And the way in which we kind of balance things out is with, with equity as you, as you explain.

So these are some elements just my home. Uh, I have a question.

Uh, banks have two kinds of, uh, accounts, savings.

And so, uh, when they, uh, give loans.

Mhm. They use many of create or uh, program accounts as well.

To be honest, I don't know how the specifics of this vary.

Like country to country. But I would say that, uh, it is not a big issue.

They, they could I mean, they have, uh, a bank account that is liabilities.

And between liabilities, you will find those two items, right?

Uh, so I don't anticipate that there should be any distinction.

Maybe a it's more up to the regulator.

If I don't know, there are certain accounts that might be a protected institution.

But in principle it is not something very relevant.

Okay. So how is money created according to what Ricardo explained to you?

He had to do with an accounting identity, right?

So when a bank issues alone, he also creates a deposit.

Right. That was pretty much the logic of it. On top of that, we have that given a certain amount of base money.

And he, I think, illustrated this with a table A you will have a multiplier effect on the money.

You remember that. So banks create money by issuing loans a that are also deposits.

And there is a part of it will be reserves.

Right. He but the base money will allow the bank to multiply or extend the money supply.

Okay. So that's pretty much the recap on banks.

Now what about capital markets. How are capital markets different from banks?

Uh, what were some of the main distinctions that Ricardo introduced?

Uh, the point of all information. Uh, okay.

Like, the information is public. Public information. So here you want to broadcast information about, I don't know, solvency,

about liquidity, about how good business is, etcetera, etcetera, and so forth.

Right. Eh. But what what is the other side of the coin of this public information?

What about small players? So.

Broadcasting that information is costly. So you have to, you know, put together some resources, some credibility.

I don't know, or if it is the case, you could try to get some rating agencies.

But if you're a grocery shop. So it would be very hard for you to do this right.

If you're a country, you kind of manage. But here, the thing is that a capital markets tend to work with a high demand, right?

So I remember Ricardo saying something like a nothing less than 25 millions is going to be on a bond or something like that, right?

So these kind of fixed costs of broadcasting A is going to act as a barrier for some for some agency.

So what are some of the characteristics of bonds and equity.

What what what what was the difference that he introduced.

Any idea how this interplay? Yes. Bonds with bonds.

You don't have, like, ownership over a company?

Correct. So basically here you have a contract, right?

It is fixed. So this amount is given and this is how much interest you're going to pay.

That's that's it. Here you're basically exposed to the performance of this firm or this business.

Right. Um that might be problematic in other sense.

Right. So you probably are familiar with the a principal and a agent problem, right?

So this is a, a fertile ground for, for that kind of thing.

So and this this I would say this is a bit difficult by itself, but this is super reliant on tons of institutions that if they're not developed,

it is hard that you observe any meaningful arm size of the of these a kind of market.

So this is the recap of some of the ideas that we kind of presented.

And now I will try to finish uh, the lecture.

Yeah. So yeah I have a question please.

Okay. Um, because the last time, if you didn't really understand, um, like, what is really how does it really work?

Maybe because I don't have a financial background.

Um, but I knew the fact that he was more riskier because he was explaining, um, how sometimes bondholders,

even if a company does in bankruptcy, first bondholders and then equity, uh, holders called last.

But I didn't really understand very well how it could impact.

Um, I mean, the explanation he gave, because then he mentioned that in all this I was a bit not so.

Okay. But you are sort of familiar with where the bond is, right?

Yes. Yeah. A equity would be pretty much you investing in, I don't know Tesla.

So you buy shares from that company and they are there is a capital market that allows

you to buy shares or at on some some markets fractions of shares of something.

And then a as a shareholder you're entitled to have a dividends right.

But that is if the business goes well. Right.

If the business does not go well then you will have losses basically.

And then the price of the of your share or the dividends, you won't get any dividends and you might lose some money a if you buy a bond from Tesla.

Right. You buy a fixed amount and they will pay you a certain interest rate and everything which is specified in the country.

But here is is is dependent on other factors that that you do not control.

And they are so every I mean every kind of dynamic that you can imagine.

For instance, a I think Ricardo mentioned this one. Typically big players and big shareholders tend to impose the agenda.

So if you only own one share, but I own, I don't know, 51% of the shares.

So I call the shots. So those are kind of the problems that we might encounter.

But happy to review that afterwards if you want more in detail. Okay.

So this is just a basic, very basic illustration of how this process looks like.

So this is the financial intermediaries banks typically.

And then we have savers borrowers right. And we have a set of institutions that have has to hold these interactions.

So we have we could make it more complex right.

So we will have, I don't know, savers that have more capital than useful projects.

Invest in, um, borrowers that have more useful projects to invest in that capital.

And then we have all these things interacting together. So we might have banks, right?

We have a might have bond market and we might have equity markets.

Right. So this is just an illustration. And I would have I would highlight the role that in certain institutions have to have

here for this to work a I now we'll try to explain that with the diagnostics three.

So when is finance the binding constraint.

So this was the original treaty. Remember this one A abides by a neoclassical and a vision of the world.

But then you might ask yourself. How do I know if I'm here?

So. Okay. High cost of finance before moving there.

What? What would that mean? How would you try to say or claim that there is a high cost of finance?

Any idea? Yeah, but normally because the interest rate is very high.

Okay. High. The high interest rates, that might be a signal whether things might be high cost of finance.

Yeah. Please. But like it's very difficult to get a loan because of multiple reasons like, you know, regressions.

I'm sure like there's very few secondary institutions. They have a lot of requirements.

Okay. So people not getting loans when they demand it, like where are your cell phones.

Okay. Okay. But then respect to what?

Like just frictions and just, you know, of course.

But let's suppose that you find that a, I don't know, 20% of the firms in Mexico complained about not getting loans.

How would you know if that is high or low? Compared to up here.

Okay, so I really do have the final ready your peers.

Right. And then you will try to assess if in the cross-section this is something that tells you something.

Right. Because if you observe that most of your peers have a complain more and you.

Maybe it's not a problem, right? So just be careful with that.

When you say high or low. Be very clear about it compared to one.

Okay, good. So we can zoom in into the specific of of clients.

This is from a report a forthcoming mind book that a the girl that has on finance.

And then we have three branches. Right. Okay.

Three big branches. So one is insufficient aggregate savings.

The question is the question right there is are there enough savings in the economy?

That's pretty much the question here. The second branch is inadequate credit market institutions.

Is that are any of those institutions that are supposed to align incentives and to mediate right between a creditors and borrowers or depositors and,

and banks are functioning well.

And the third one is okay.

It may be the case that there are enough savings in the economy, and they are profitable projects in the economy, but they do not match.

Right. So there is poor intermediation. So the resources are not getting to the projects.

So we will explore this in more detail.

So. We kind of already discussed this.

How would you test where the constraint is. Finance.

So what does it mean for finance to be a constraint. We would expect it to be relatively scarcer than all other inputs.

That would be the first thing that we will expect.

So that if agents have more access to capital they would invest more,

that that would be a the logical conclusion as opposed to take capital out of the country.

One of the questions that we typically ask when we go into projects A when we travel to counterparts,

we ask businessmen, what would you do if you would have if I give you, I don't know, $50 million.

And we're trying to assess it or I would open a new facility.

I would a I don't know, try to enter this market.

I would, I don't know, a marriage with this company and so forth or.

No, I would just take my money to Switzerland. Right. There are very different answers and they can be very informative.

So ideally, if the agent have more access to the capital, they would invest more.

That's the principle. Uh, and how would we test for this.

So we already established our criteria.

Right. So what was the first one? What was the first thing that we we will what we would like to see or assess?

Price. Price. Okay. Then.

We would expect to see a high price. And then, as Juan Pablo already kind of mentioned, we might have higher interest rate on loans, right.

But then be sure to establish relative to what?

But it also could be the case, as you also mentioned, that, okay,

there might might be people that are demanding credit have ideas that don't get credit.

So maybe we would have a shadow price here.

The shadow price of people demanding credit and not getting credit. How could we measure this?

How do you think we could go wrong and maybe try to interfere?

How pressing this issue is. Probably surveys.

Surveys. Okay, that's a good idea. So there is a valuable resource that you might want to explore.

Is the world Bank Enterprise Service.

Okay. There there's a bunch of questions to firms.

And we have a whole section devoted to finance.

So I don't know a what percentage of your operations are financed by loans or a how long does it take for you to get a loan and so forth.

Right. So ideally we would try to to to see that a they have data for 155 countries.

Some of them have more than two years.

So you ideally could see some changes over time.

But if not you still can work with the cross-section a.

And then we have a or second criteria which is changes and changes.

Right. So when it comes to finance, we would expect to observe that changes in the interest rate.

Produce changes in investment. If it is the case that you're just a doing a scatter plot and you observe no relationship,

then you can maybe discard that because then it tells you that a investment is not is is not as responsive.

As you would expect, the interest rate. Okay.

So that would be one thing that you can check. What are the two things that we're missing from the tests?

We're just missing animals. Come on. Are we missing here in the desert?

Okay. That's one. And camels and hippos. So what would you expect about, I mean, when it comes to finance, how would you observe camels and hippos?

What does your intuition as diagnostician says?

What do you expect to see if there is a sector that is typically reliant on finance?

If finance is a constraint so not developed. So it probably would be underdeveloped, right.

And you probably could observe that firms that rely more on finance in their operations by their own or because they have a headquarter elsewhere,

would perform better. That's an hypothesis. So that's something that you can check.

So yes. Are capital intensive industries underperforming?

That's a question that you can ask. And finally hypos in this area.

So if there happens to be a firm that is typically finance intensive or capital intensive, how the [INAUDIBLE] did the firm get there?

So I can tell you from my experience in a service in Azerbaijan, a.

Lending in tends to be problematic.

There are a lot of firms that that don't get credit, and sometimes it's the spreads and the interest rate that they have to face are high.

But if you are so right, or if you are a, I don't know, related to the presidential family, it tends to be easier, right?

So that's how some agents bypass the constraint.

You did some of that, right? Uh, you you you can testify is true.

Okay, so why don't we start exploring branch?

Why branch? So insufficient aggregate savings.

That would be okay. There are not enough resources.

Remember that when we introduced this, we have I mean, these two sites.

If we don't have resources here, then maybe we are having difficulty to get resources over there.

Right. So this is what we testing here. So maybe it is the case that we don't have enough savings.

But there are two important things here.

The sources that we might have a for for savings are both domestic and foreign.

Right. So if you are in a perfectly open economy,

you shouldn't have a savings restriction because in theory you would you would be free to access resold resources elsewhere.

You could borrow money from abroad. Uh, easily.

So how open to international finance your country?

Your regions might matter. So here we can see some of that.

So, you know, a small open economy with an open capital account.

There should be there should always be enough foreign savings to finance anything.

That's what I just stated. So we need to argue that something limits the access right of your country to foreign savings.

Eh? This we will explain further in week ten when we see the balance of payments.

But this might play a role here. How open your economy is to a foreign capital.

Um, you might also want to argue that domestic savings are inadequate.

So there is a shortfall of domestic savings. Again, how would you try to illustrate that your country has low domestic savings?

What? What kind of evidence you would try to use to see if that is the case.

You can compare it to beers. Okay. Yeah, that that's ideal, but.

But how would you do that? I would provide you with an easy entry point.

Then you can try to keep refining it that you ideally would plot a scatter plot.

Right. And then you could have income per capita in the y axis or in the x axis.

Sorry. And in the y axis you would have domestic savings.

And then you you get to see how it works in the world.

And then you can, I don't know, highlight your pure countries in a specific color.

And then you start making sense of the data.

And then you see if that holds if, if that, if you I don't know as time as time evolves, if something changes.

So there are things that you can do in that regard.

But ideally you would like to know, given my income per capita, what should be my expected savings?

Domestic savings. Okay, good.

Uh, great. So a again, you would have to where you hear that you have both low, low domestic savings and also bad international finance.

So only saying that you have low domestic savings is not enough.

A, if you don't make the point that your country's is, I don't know, some in some sense close to the international markets.

A there is a loose a piece there.

Okay. So what about the other the other third branch.

Remember we have here savers savers and borrowers.

Right. And then here we were saying okay, you know there are savings in the economy either because they come from domestic

sources or foreign sources and there are enough good ideas in the economy.

They're profitable projects. The problem is in in the intermediation why it might be the case.

So that's what we're arguing here. Okay. So for intermediation, uh, how would you diagnose a intermediation and its causes.

So basically the problem here as I just stated would not be aggregate savings.

But basically they cannot be access. Right? A agents or this is the assumption agents will have access to all the letters except this.

So this is the thing that is messing up right.

So one piece of evidence is high intermediation cost.

A very high spreads between deposit and lending rates might be an indicative.

Also a um how would you why would lending.

This was something that Ricardo presented. Why would lending space be high.

Because a banks are sorry. You know this is another slide, but this is this is a broader question.

Why would lending spreads V high. So there might be multiple hypotheses.

So one is because banks are inefficient. Again we are trying to mobilize resources from savers to borrowers.

And then we might have inefficient banks. If that is the case how could we tell.

One indicator might be just looking at high operating costs.

Right. There's an indicator in the macro data set that you will have that can tells you something about this.

It has coverage for most of the countries okay.

So you might be able to work with it. So this would be one thing that you would like to see.

Uh, do banks in my country have a high operating cost?

A another hypothesis is because banks have more monopoly power.

So imagine that you just have 3 or 2 banks in the economy.

Uh, maybe their incentives are not aligned with efficiently mobilizing resources between savers and borrowers,

but the incentives are aligned with capturing some sort of profits and rents that are in there.

Right. So this might be another hypothesis. How could we try to see this if this is the case?

How would you identify, uh, some sort of monopoly power?

In fact, if what I'm saying is true. Right. If the incentives of the banks.

Are languid, capturing some profit while we try to observe their ratio of loans.

The ratio of capital and loans that someone gives some indicator of profitability, right?

Profit margins or something.

If there are exceptionally high profit margins, it might be indicative that a this banks might have a certain degree of monopoly power.

Uh, another instance could be that lending is risky, and it might be risky because the economy is risky or because customers are risky.

Right? Eh. So how could we tell what what is the the indicator that captures things when typically loans go wrong?

How how do you call a loan that goes wrong? Default rates.

Sorry. Default okay. Default. We also call them non-performing loans.

Right. Loans that a a are not being paid uh are non-performing loans.

And then if that is the case, if banks in your country have high non-performing loans,

that may be an indicator that a something might be a something is risky about lending in that country.

A and another hypothesis is that a financial intermediation can be heavily taxed.

You will even either implicitly or explicitly.

Okay. So a one instance of a and implicit a measure of that would be high reserve requirements.

So you just said super high preset requirements that a I don't know, give the central bank a more more resources or the government.

Typically this is associated with fiscal things. We will explore more of that when we see fiscal A.

Another hypothesis A or an associated indicator to this would be in identifying how much credit is directed to,

as always, that is in in some sort a form of appropriation by development of financial resources.

And. Okay. So again these are some indicators that might guide your a iterative process of diagnostics.

Uh and then a relevant question would be how how can you tell apart a profitable bank from a risky bank.

In finance, what what kind of indicators would would you use to to see if something is profitable?

Profit margin. Okay. Profit margin is one that we mentioned.

But see for instance, if we look a I don't know and uh, a stock of let's say Bank of America, then we will have the price of the stock, right.

That would be one thing. And we also have information about how much dividends Bank of America base to their shareholders.

So we can a get something that it's called the price to earnings ratio.

Right. So price to earnings ratio A might a tell us something about how profitable a how how come.

Yeah. How do we distinguish between profitable or risky events.

So in theory a company with a high a price earnings ratio would be one that the discounted a present value of all these flows.

A it's is is is high right. We could hypothetically also have some risky a companies with high b n e ratios.

But they tend to be volatile. So that's another aspect that you might consider.

So if if there is a signal that tells us okay, this bank appears to be profitable in the long term a and it is not only profitable but is stable.

This is it's yeah, kind of stable profitable.

But then you could also have some a right some, some, some companies that might exhibit uh increasing pennies and then decreasing pennies.

And that might be not as a convincing as the first one.

Okay, so this was about. This side of the tree.

The second. So this was this, right?

Now we will explore the this branch here.

So it also might be the case that there is not a in equity.

Right. So it could be the downside okay. But equity is in short supply.

So again typically capitalization solvency tends to be regulated.

What would you expect if finance is a constraint and capitalization is an issue.

So that is the bank cannot make more loans because to some extent it owes it already reached the threshold imposed by the regulation.

Why would you expect to to to observe it. That is the case.

So probably most of the banks will be operating at the threshold, right?

If there is a regulatory threshold that says, okay, you can only make loans on up to the, I don't know,

x percent of your equity, then we probably would observe that banks are lending at x percent and there is fixated there.

So I really one question of that might be if equity and debt are substitutes or complement in or lend,

they tend to be more a complement that substitutes.

So they are things that you own that you don't owe.

These are these equity. And the more more equity that you have, the more you can get in loans.

Right? It typically acts as a collateral. So the more stuff that you have that you own, the more the more that you can ask from banks.

So this is what the judge stated. What would be the behavior of banking system if there is a shortage of equity in the economy?

They would not lend because firms are over leveraged already.

So this is when a firms do not own equity.

So if you have no collateral it's hard for a bank to issue a loan.

Right. A and then this was the point that I highlighted.

How would you know if the problem is lack of equity in the banks themselves.

So they would be at their legal limit? That is the argument that I just made.

They would have excess cash reserves. They would have difficulty raising equity.

So if you, for instance, observe that equity has been stuck in the banking system for a long time,

that also might be an indicator that something is a going wrong on that front.

Okay. So we explored these a branch of the tree.

We also explored this branch of the tree. And now we were left with this a middle branch of the tree.

So. A relevant question is are risk mitigation institutions not working well.

So again, one of the first problems that we introduced with finance was a time inconsistency.

Right. It might be the case that I get the loan and I don't want to pay back.

What typically happens is that the bank will have some collateral.

What if the bank cannot execute the collateral. Right.

So these are all relevant questions that we might consider.

Can judges seize collateral? Can it be liquidated afterward even if it exists?

Right. Is there even a good purpose rate property registry?

What about if that is not the case? And instead of observing a non-performing loans, we might see banks sitting on excess reserves.

So again this might be a situation in which there are resources.

There are ideas. But banks decided not to learn and they don't have high profit margins.

They don't have monopoly power. They there are not high spreads, but they are not a lending.

It also might be due to the fact that this a institutional setting.

It does not favor credit graded operations.

Okay. So. Any question up to this point?

Just to recap, we just explored the three branches of these a finance specific diagnostic tree that I have.

I have a question. Um, and it's what sort of what levels of income.

You typically see finance as the binding constraint, because I think to very poor countries like all of these are constraints, like, right.

There's not even a property registry, um, lots of informal settlements.

Um, but what has what sort of where do you think this is most applicable or is it applicable across incomes and some other things?

That's actually an excellent question. Um, and I would invite you to, to revisit, um, the binding constraint definition.

So this might be a problem for all the developing world.

So ideally we would want them to have better access to finance.

And so for us education as infrastructure as all the unreleased that we have reviewed previously.

But the question that we asking is that what is the specific thing that will enable the largest growth?

It might not be finance, all the finance, but maybe problematic, maybe after overcoming some constraint, finance might be the pressing issue.

So. So yes and no.

I mean we might have a economies that have specific issues on finance and most of them that I the ones that I've seen tend to be middle income,

low income countries. A I remember that the in Ethiopia we have some constraints on the on the financial side.

A but again the logic of these approaches, this might be a problem,

but I should focus on this thing that will enable the country to grow the most to the point where other things might be the priority.

So if in the in, in the case of country X it is, I don't know infrastructure then I go with is restructure.

Once that kind of level off probably I would need to revisited my my diagnostic and go to finance.

So essentially it depends basically. And then you should up the thing that I didn't.

And so yeah that's that's the intuition.

So again I just have this in mind when you are doing your piece that uh, it might be useful and I don't know for later the next one.

Uh, okay. So so a quick question.

Yes. Um, I still can't really get why that's an equity, uh, complimentary because functionally,

firms use it to finance, um, between the to and from the, uh, like, supply side.

It's either you're getting the residual claim or the fixed claim.

So like talking about the same Pi.

So how are they complementary and sort of when when Ricardo makes this argument typically does it from the French perspective.

Um, he said that. The more equity you have, the more access you will have also to to loans.

Right. And you might a distribute the your ideal combination depending on your needs.

So for some firms in may be more convenient to have more capital and less loans.

A for some firms they sometimes a it take loans to buy their shares a so it might happen a little bit.

But the thing is or the point is that typically the less that you need to create,

the more credit you get when you realize that you that if I'm rich again,

I can get more credit because I have assets, I have something that I own that I don't owe for firms is the same.

This kind of the more collateral I have, uh, the more equity I have, the more I can ask.

So here the equity is not. In a sense of like issuing the equity, but equity in a sense of asset minus liabilities and kind of yeah okay.

Okay. Okay.

So let us take a look at the case of Brazil.

This was something that Ricardo did in 2007 a and think, yeah, I think we made it so.

This starts by saying that Brazil growth look unimpressive.

So either if you take, I don't know, a three year period growth or a 13 year period growth, Brazil related to peers was unimpressive.

And then this is another shot. This is the kind of share that, uh, Ricardo likes that we don't like, but still won't explain.

A so this is the maximum a growth rate that Brazil achieved over a 20 year period.

So from the 60s to the 80s, Brazil reach up a an average growth of 4%.

And this is the growth, the average growth for the rest of the period.

What this is trying to compare basically,

is that a the 20 year growth looks unimpressive by world because these are the this is the rest of the world and Brazilian standards.

So it is quite below its maximum growth on uh on this.

So this is just to illustrate that growth was not impressive at all.

On top of that, a GDP per capita relative to the US, uh, started falling since the 80s, as you can see here.

Um, also the share of world GDP in PBB started falling in.

And he not only makes the point that growth was unimpressive.

He also claims that growth was not sustainable, that it was high for what it should be.

So here are some things that he points out.

So first Brazil became a super a reliant on imports.

So we have imports the red line exports the blue line and the current account green line.

And basically this is to say that Brazil started demanding more tradable than the ones that Brazil could pay for.

So here we have a current, uh, an increasing current account deficit.

And here we have, uh, an appreciating real exchange rate.

Okay. So these are two elements that will play a role.

Eh. As you will see now. Eh, this was also a view that the world then had at the time.

It in the rest of the world, inflation was associated with food and energy prices at that stage.

So that is 2005 2007. Eh, inflation came from the food and energy in Brazil.

Non-tradable were raising faster than these two things.

So haircuts, restaurants and so forth.

Okay. A demand was rising faster than supply.

And he finds in in this paper you can a look for it.

That sustainable growth was below 5%.

In the case of Brazil. Uh which implies that we would have, uh, something like 3% per year per working person.

So this that's a very modest a growth.

And then the source of inflation in Brazil was then if we if it was not energy

and it was associated with non-tradable we everything that I don't know,

you go from haircuts, restaurants, all those things that are produced are consumed domestically.

This would be clear when we go to macro.

But but yeah, just keep the idea on my, uh.

Good. So he started here so high cost of finance.

And then the first thing he observed was, okay,

let's take the lending rate in this period and the gross investment in this period and let's see what the data tells.

Right. So rescue right.

Super high real. This is real discount in inflation.

Real interest rate close to 40%.

And then this is investment right. And he also did this for the real deposit rate is also high.

Eh. And this is just income. This was the the kind of the scatterplot.

It was pointed at you pointing.

And you just a a while ago. But here the argument is that okay what is weird.

Let's see if you get it. What is weird about this this this graph here.

Let me rephrase the question. What would be the expected real interest rate of a country that saves or invest what Brazil invests?

Date around ten five. What would. How would you do that?

Would you just go vertically. Right. And you go down right.

So something like here, right. I don't know.

The point is that how come you have such a high real interest rate, but you still are kind of on the average for gross investment.

You're not here. I mean, if you were here, I would understand that, right?

Super high interest rate, super low investment.

The fact that Brazil is here might suggest something about the deficiency of investment.

How come basically these are other countries.

This is interest rate, right? This is investment rate. These are other countries.

And this is Brazil. And basically Brazil would be in a different curve in which if Brazil wasn't in this curve,

probably at the interest rate that they're paying, they would have very, very low investment rate.

But here a they have, uh, a marginal efficiency that is higher and allows them to have both high interest rate and high investment rates.

So this is just an explanation that he gave for this phenomenon.

This is just to say this is weird.

The only thing that might explain this is that actually, I mean, there are attractive projects even at these interest rates.

And if they are attractive projects, because in some sense these must be efficient.

Yes. What about you? Can I have a question? Shouldn't we see, like, uh, like it seems like the correlation is zero, uh, roughly in the diagram.

Right. Um, shouldn't we see a more strong I think it's negative relationship.

I, I mean, yeah, I would start by saying you might have your priors from what you would theoretically expect,

but then these might be super influenced by of layers. Right.

Maybe if you remove Brazil I don't know Gambia here.

Guinea Myanmar I don't know a but certainly I don't know if there is something about this period.

It should be. It might be a good idea just checking if this was I don't know if this responded to in a specific context.

And remember that the interest rates here a if I'm not mistaken, they they were flexible.

So like they were low like worldwide.

Uh, it would be interesting to know how it changed after, I don't know, the fed uh, increase the interest rate like more recently.

Uh, but again, you can go in for detail if you want, but this is all I'm trying to explain here.

So this is Brazil's a real in rate.

This is the a gross investment. And this is the theoretical explanation that we got against this.

No changes in changes. We observed that there are movements of investment in response to interest rate.

So this is the interest rate. And we observe a clear a negative relationship between both.

So okay it then it appears to be the case that a there there are some a changes in changes kind of things happen in here.

A some people might say but wait, look, why don't we try these ones?

Maybe the problem might be human capital or bad infrastructure or taxes.

There might be other things that A might be playing a role also.

Well, Brazil has the lowest public investment, some of the lowest public investment rates in the world at that time.

And invest invested very little in infrastructure and it was declining.

So this is infrastructure. This is taxes.

Brazilian companies complained. Complained more than most about high taxes.

This is Brazil. Here. Super high. This is income level, right?

And this is the percentage of firms that A complain about taxes a as a major as a major constraint.

Um here we have schooling and then we have average age of schooling here.

And they mysterion a return to schooling. So we have high returns and low average years of schooling.

It may be then perceived as this is causing and expensive.

So the question is why not these factors.

And why investment. Why not?

Why don't we. Are you. You know what it is investment in infrastructure or it is taxes or it is education.

How would we distinguish if we are on the right hand side of the tree or in the left hand side of the tree?

Maybe another question would clarify this.

What would be the the relationship that you expect from a low education or low infrastructure, or high taxes on investment?

High taxes would do it in with high taxes, with lower investment.

A poorly prepared labor force probably would lower investment and poor infrastructure probably would lower investment.

So if these things were true, we should be observing also low levels of investment.

So does this mean that these other factors are not binding as much?

Yes, that is Ricardo's answer. So bad infrastructure, low human capital and high taxes reduce demand for investment.

That is what we just stated. They lower expected returns.

If those things are bad then investment should be a low and yet to prevent investment from being any higher.

That is Ricardo's hypothesis. The central Bank of Brazil needs to set super high real interest rates.

If these factors were improved, the central bank would react with even higher interest rates.

That is what he claims. This is why you need to consider the interactions between constraints in here.

Uh, now, uh, yes.

I don't I don't get the rationale because if taxes are high but public investment is low, right?

Uh huh. Then what are the expectations that that because they said high interest rates, they will attract more investment.

No, they are they trying to prevent more investment.

That's what Ricardo's saying here. These. So basically a.

If yeah, if any of these factors would improve, we would expect to have even higher investment.

That is what he's saying. If we had lower taxes, if we have better infrastructure,

if we have better human capital or better schooling in on the workforce, we would expect to have higher investment.

A and a yeah, that's pretty much the point he's making here.

Yeah. What I hear you saying is that a if we are to.

Good good good. You phrase maybe if I said I mean why in such a context.

High taxes, low public investment, low infrastructure. What do you want to prevent investment there.

If you don't if your taxes are not converted into what you mean there.

You mean where we assume.

Oh, well, the thing is that the whole point I see him making here is none of these factors seem to be the relevant constraint,

because if that was the case, we would not observe higher investment.

How would you expect, uh, how do you explain the fact that regardless of public infrastructure,

a low, a schooling, um, high taxes, there still is sort of an an appetite for investment?

That is the whole point that he's trying to make here. Uh, I'm just trying to pay more attention to how these things interact.

But I do think one thing about this logic that I don't get either is why is it it's right?

Why are they setting higher interest rates? They have low growth.

Um, exactly. Okay. Yeah, that's absolutely the controversial question.

What does it. Yeah. We haven't gone in there okay.

And why there are super high interest rate. There is still a an elephant in the room.

Right. Good. So the thing here.

This is just a point to make to me about a Granger causality.

This is just statistical causality.

And he basically says that it lack growth is not correlated with savings A and that lack savings is correlated with growth.

A and the point here is that if savings were ample, if they were abundant, banks would not be willing to pay much for deposit.

But here we think we see that this is a yeah, this is like per capita income.

Again, this is just the deposit rate to to illustrate that it is also high.

But if savings were ample a day, the central bank would not have to set the highest real overnight rate in the world to achieve its inflation target.

So here I think we're missing a.

And this is a graph that we have a further ahead.

But it appears to be the case that savings are low.

And savings being low means that a in order to achieve this inflation target, the overnight rate is super high.

A the government pays 10% of real interest rate on public debt.

A this is nominal between May 8007 and 2008.

A and here. Uh, yeah. This is just a spread interest rate.

This graph just says this is deposit rate here. And this is interest is practices.

The difference with a deposit interest rate and lending interest rate.

And again we see Brazil here a this is just to remind you I think Ricardo a introduce this.

But why lending rates are higher than a deposit rate.

Basically because you have to pay with loans.

You only can charge the interest on one part your assets.

Remember that reserves don't get interest. So we the interest on loans you have to pay for deposits and for equity.

Right. So this illustrates that a the the spread goes up when the deposit interest rate goes up.

A what I'm going with this. Uh, this is uh no, just not as important.

But here interest rates on deposit overnight and public debt are very high.

So deposits are high overnight and public debt are hype.

These a also we establish that savings grandeur causes growth recent a recent acceleration a coincides with easing of savings constraint.

That is when this they when uh deposit a interest rate falls the spread also falls is not that the spread it is still a super hike.

And here is when a record introduced the introduces the explanation.

So basically the syndrome that he proposes is the overcommitted state.

Overcommitted state. The government has unusually large current spending commitments in Brazil.

Uh, there is an institutional factor that is a legacy of the 1987 constitution.

Um, to face those, uh, burdens, a Brazil has basically relied on very high taxes,

a very low public investment and high fiscal deficits and public debt.

So this starts interacting with the fiscal side of the equation.

Uh, this is just a public consumption in blue.

And this is a public investment in red. So the red one is here.

14 the public consumption one is more steady increasing.

This is a government revenue and low GDP per capita.

Brazil is among the highest in the world and is kind of increasing over time.

A and again with the lowest public investment, a this is a how a investment has absorbed about 2% of the GDP and this is nominal deficit.

A and here.

A we observe that public that has been hired recently following partly because of valuation reasons.

But here a Brexit had a debt to GDP ratio of above 40% back then.

And this is how it evolved. And here is the syndrome explanation.

So one thing maybe over taxation that would produce low investment demand and low interest rates,

low infrastructure could also produce low demand investment demand, but also low interest rates.

And state that over borrows will create a low supply of savings but high interest rates.

This is typically what is known as the crowding out.

So there is a limited pool of financial resources in the economy.

Right. And then to finance their operations, the government takes a big chunk of it,

taking a big chunk of it because it demands a lot give us with low savings, give us a high interest rate.

And that high interest rate also kind of affects the rest of the economy, and they have to manage and deal with it.

So this is pretty much what a Ricardo got here.

So the other borrowing state, this is what would explain having low supply of savings and high interest rates.

Both things that we observe it here.

We're almost out of time. But this is the interpretation.

The government fell into a trap of over commitment, public consumption, pensions, debt service to generate market stability.

It was forced to impose high Texas redux, reduce public investment and borrow a lot.

This is something that Brazil did a and Texas had extracted over 40% of national income from high savers and transfer it to low savers.

That's some information. This is the a pensions system.

This is the pay as you go system. Also lower demand for savings because if you have a capitalization system, right,

an individual capitalization system, you might have incentives to save because you're saving for your retirement.

If there is a pay as you go system, you might not be as incentivized to save as in the other is an area A,

but there are many good things in the economy because in a high marginal return to private investment,

this is why we still observe high interest rates with high levels of investment or relatively normal levels of invest.

Low savings and high public borrowing required a high real interest rate equilibrium.

This is the closing argument. Okay, so these I will leave for you to review.

I just want to introduce two things here. Ask yourself these questions before starting your diagnosis on finance.

How does government finance its obligations. As we saw we just saw in the case of Brazil it might be important how do large corporation

and it gets how how do large corporations and as always get a financial resources.

How do household finance things if at all. What do these agents a use finance to buy.

These are all relevant questions that might.

