[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Many ways to get around the patient.

I would get my kids to differentiate.

That's what I wanted. I thought you wanted to know.

Yeah. You probably. Interactive author.

When? You read things that you can learn about.

There's not so much time that you haven't studied. Um, I thought that was very, very.

Important to concentrate on. Yeah. Oh, no no no no no.

Uh huh. They won't. Find.

It on their own. Uh, comments. And then. Uh.

Uh. Yeah.

Go ahead. I think I got it all right.

Yeah, I think that's encouraging. Why did you.

Let me answer that. Oh, well, you have to do it.

No, you don't want it to be, you know. Oh, it's like one of my texts, you know.

Oh, yeah. You're like, oh, yeah.

Somebody's printed. Oh. Thank you. Thanks.

Okay. It's like a. Yeah.

All right scenario. So. Yeah. Um, so a couple of announcements.

Um, and the problem set is do the next Wednesday problem set three.

And next week we're going to have three lectures. Oh, yeah.

We're going to have labor markets on all on the bus on labor markets on Tuesday.

And inequality and inclusion on Thursday and national accounts on Friday.

Huh. It's very important. A few people attended the lecture on Tuesday and that's.

Unfortunately very bad because it's a very important lecture for you to do a good growth diagnostic.

So it's important that you watch the video of, uh, you know,

how to diagnose financial problems and the discussion of the state, the case of Brazil on finance.

So it's important that if if you didn't attend or if you're watching this video that then can you discuss that.

So today we're going to diagnose issues related to human capital.

But let me start by reminding you a little bit about, um, about how, how, uh, um, a growth diagnostic is supposed to, uh, go in all the stages of it.

First of all, you know, you want to understand a good description of growth in your country.

I mean, episodes, accelerations, decelerations, um, structure.

You know, what the [INAUDIBLE] has happened? Um, so that you can pose the right growth question.

It's really, you know, it's a little bit hard to get to the right answer if you have the wrong question.

So, and, and there are subtle differences on the question that you can ask.

In some cases it's kind of like straightforward.

This country you know has been laggard and growth etcetera relative to whoever or whatever comparison group you want.

And so the question is, you know, insufficient growth.

But in many other instances the question can be a little bit more subtle.

So posed the right question. Then you're listing all possible hypotheses of what could explain this in some kind of diagnostic

tree decision tree where you don't have to test everything because if they are nested,

you can kind of like not have to get through the whole, uh, decision tree.

You know, you know, if if it's obvious that finance is not the constraint, then.

Yeah. All questions about what kind of failure does the financial system have become irrelevant because finance is not the constraint.

So you're looking elsewhere. So it's a very important from an economical point of view, to do not waste your time,

but also from a narrative point of view that you're quickly focusing on where you think the problems are and after.

So after you have that tree, you go down that tree and, and you formulate some kind of a a.

Us. You're going to focus on a kind of syndrome that explains A and why you're observing the kind of symptoms you're observing.

So in the case of Brazil, for example, yes,

it was true that taxes are very high and it was true that infrastructure investment was very low, etc., etc.

Um, but still interest rates were super high.

And if you had invested in more human capital and more infrastructure, would I make investment even more attractive?

And given the constraint on savings, interest rates would have gone even further.

All right. So. So yeah.

So you want the story to explain that. And the story was.

There is uh, there is uh, a constraint in um, in, uh, the, um,

the availability of savings in the economy because the government went through a constitutional reform,

increased government spending by ten percentage points of GDP, caused a major fiscal imbalance.

And they addressed that fiscal imbalances by raising taxes like crazy.

And that's why people complain about taxes by cutting infrastructure spending like crazy.

And that's why infrastructure is so lousy. But in spite of all that, right, uh, there's more demand for investment than there is supply of savings.

And so the equilibrium interest rate is sky high until people stop wanting to invest.

Okay, so that's the syndrome. So the syndrome has a fiscal origin.

But we got there by focusing on, you know, figuring out that constraint was finance and figuring out that the financial constraint had macro origins.

Okay. So that's that's an example of, of uh, of uh a growth diagnostic.

And you see, you don't not, do not obviously know where you're going to end when you start the process.

Right. So information gets revealed in a nested way as you go through the decision tree.

You wanted to say something, but no. Okay, good, good.

And then once you have a good theory of what, uh, what what the story is,

then you can start imagining theories of change as to what it is that you would do to relax those constraints.

Right. So it's very hard to start giving, you know, policy recommendations like in the, in the, um, Washington consensus approach,

where, you know, the solution before you know what the problem is here, you want to know what the you know how to act on this.

You got to have a good idea of what the nature of the problem is.

Okay. So again, in order to test hypotheses, we have our for a, for um, a, um, a test.

The first one is that the shadow, the price or the shadow price of the constraints should be high.

And you have to be smart at looking for prices. And again, you know, people tend to look at quantities not at prices.

And quantities can be quantities are low, maybe because of low supply or maybe because of low demand,

and maybe because of low demand, because something else is constraint that is a complement of this.

And so the constraint on the other thing causes the demand for this one to be low.

For example, you might say Venezuelan and education is lousy, but given how many other things are lousy here,

there is an excess supply of human capital in Venezuela that is leaving the country because given,

you know, property rights, given, you know, macro stability, given whatever,

you know, the returns to human capital are super low and people are leaving.

So it doesn't mean that the supply of human capital is perfect, excellent, and so on.

It just means that it's not the binding constraint. Okay.

So.

And by the way, when you present in early December your final results and you just show me whether this is a constraint because quantities are low.

Remember I'm going to say what about prices.

Okay. So the price has to be high.

Movements in the constraint have to cause things.

Because you're telling me that this is the thing that is constraining everything and it moved.

I should observe movement. Okay. Number three.

Camels and hippos are the things that are least intensive in the binding constraint.

Must be doing relatively better. Okay.

Because the constraint doesn't hit everybody the same, you should be able to figure out know the things that are least firm.

Constraint should have should be better able to survive and thrive.

And finally hippos in the desert, right?

That if you can't find the hippo in the middle of a desert, you want to know how the [INAUDIBLE] did it get there?

It wasn't supposed to be there. It has to have had a way around the binding constraint.

And sometimes those hippos in the desert can also be very informative as to, you know, confirming your priors as to what's the mining constraint.

So this lecture is supposed to be about human capital. Okay.

Now human capital is a really a confusing term because economists define it in one way and then measure it in a radically different way.

They define it as something that is in the person that makes an hour's work more productive.

But it doesn't tell you what's in the person, just that whatever that is, times the one hour work generates more the more of this thing you have.

Okay. But then the standard way of measuring it, and you can see it in a thousand million papers is years of schooling of the labor force.

And and that is one of the most a accepted and ridiculous measures of human capital.

Then when they when they want to correct it, they're going to correct it.

And I'm going to show you by not something about what did the learned person know,

but by something about some test that was taken from their score like piece, our teams or whatever.

Right. Um, as if human capital has a [INAUDIBLE] of a lot to do with schooling and that that's going to be, uh, in my mind, um, a common error.

And one of the consequences of that error is that we seldom, seldom find a schooling as being particularly the issue.

And we we prepared a bunch of cases for you here in this lecture.

How many? Four or so. And you'll see that this definition of human capital is never going to carry too much water.

But as you know, in our, in our mind, the human capital that people have in mind,

um, and that it gets emphasized in this edition of H, h is can be high or low.

It's a one dimensional thing that can be high or low.

But there's very little understanding that this human capital is really a vector in some skill space where,

you know, your dentist tends not to be your lawyer.

And, you know, a world with two lawyers or two dentists is different from a world with a lawyer and a dentist.

Right. So, so these, these things about them, the diversity of human capital tends to not be in the, in the literature.

So I want you to think about these. These two dimensions.

This one is high or low, but this one is like the spectrum of light.

This is blue. This is red. This is yellow. Right. Different colors.

Now we know that a rich countries tend to have more years of schooling than poor countries.

And we know from previous lectures that, you know, if that relationship does not.

This slope has very little to do with what you should expect to obtain if you were to increase the human capital of a country.

Right. Because in, you know, this was what you would have expected that slope would have implied in terms of if you increased human human capital,

years of schooling, how much GDP per capita you should obtain.

But in reality, what we found out is that people with six years of schooling were making $10,000 in 1970 and were making $1,000 in 2010.

Okay, and that people with six years of schooling, a people with no at that same level of income,

suddenly had 8.7 years of schooling and the same level of income.

So. And we know that, you know, these evolutions of human capital don't map into evolutions of GDP per capita and so on.

So so there isn't a very tight relationship between whatever measures of schooling you have and whatever measures of GDP per capita that you have.

Okay. So that those relationships are very, very soft.

Okay. Um, now there have been some attempts to improve those measures and the attempts have been done in the following way.

And this is called learning adjusted years of schooling.

Um, and simply you take your years of schooling, you multiply by your score in the exam divided by the score in Singapore.

So Singapore is kind of the best performer.

If you're at 80% of Singapore, it means that your years of schooling are worth 80% of Singaporean year of school.

Okay. And once you do this transformation, you you get more or less the same thing.

Okay. So, um, that's just to.

You know, prepare ourselves to some of the results here.

We are going to have to be much smarter in terms of trying to identify, um, some things.

And I'm going to show you some econometric tricks that we have used in, in the past.

So let me talk to you about Chiapas.

Chiapas is the poorest state in in Mexico.

It's on the border with Guatemala. Um, on January 1st, 1994, it erupted in, uh, revolt by the Society Star Liberation Front.

And then and so the government got really, really scared and and they gave us a ton of money and they invested massively in us.

Okay. So it's interesting because, you know, government was a security issue.

They were very generous to Japan. So Japan is, as I said before, the poorest people in Mexico.

And it's uh, you have to multiply by a factor of six to get from Chiapas to a federal district, you in the capital city of Mexico.

And not only that, it is, uh, it was the state with the slowest growth rate in Mexico.

So it was poor and getting poorer. Okay.

Um, and getting getting not poor, but I mean, farther away from the Mexican median.

If you look at years of schooling, it's clear that Japan has fewer, less years of schooling than Mexico.

It has more illiterate people. It has more people with zero schooling.

It has it more people who didn't finish primary school.

It has fewer people who finished secondary school. Okay, so these are all quantities.

So that's less schooling. Okay. And the quality of that schooling was relatively low.

So this is unconditional, uh, quality of schooling.

Eh. Um, and and this one, eh?

You condition for rural?

Indigenous. Maybe gender, whatever variables you have.

And this is the unconditional one. Ehm.

Um, it's also kind of look, um, um, and this is for education.

We have quality of education. So we could control for quality of education.

Okay. So okay, so you have all this data, this data in the case of Mexico, eh.

There are. And by the way, it's important for you to know vis a population censuses in their standard questionnaire don't have information on wages,

occupations or industries, but they do.

When they do a census they do a sample which is called in this literature the long form and then this sample.

They typically ask those questions and wages occupation industry which for us are very useful.

In the case of Mexico they do a 10% sample. In the case of the US they do a 5% sample.

In the case of Panama, which I'm going to talk about, they do a 100% sample.

So everybody does long form okay. So if you have access to a population census find out.

Do you know what's the long form. How big is the long form.

Because that has wages. And you can use that for menstrual regressions.

You don't have a census. You can use uh labor force survey or household survey.

In the case of Chile, you have these very good service called, uh, like a sim.

Etcetera. Good. So. So you're going to run this kind of regression, the log of wages.

And you're going to put dummy I mean constant education experience, experience.

I'm going to tell you what it is education. Sometimes you have to construct it.

Sometimes they don't tell you years of schooling. They tell you finish primary.

Did you finished primary. Did you finish secondary or partial secondary.

So you're going to add maybe attribute. You can run it with dummies for whatever category they have.

Or you can run it with them. Or you can calculate years of schooling and based on what they tell you.

Okay. Second variable that's used in this literature is something that they call experience.

And this is also a misnomer if you think that education is a misnomer, experience is also a misnomer,

because the standard way to calculate experience is you assume that a a year of experience is a year of experience.

Now, there are some people who have ten years of experience, and other people who have one year of experience repeated ten times.

Right. And you understand that experience is not the same thing because you always ask yourself, you know, in a CV,

what experience do you have and do you want to look at, you know, you know, the breadth of that experience.

But in this literature, typically the experience that you use is going to be the age minus six,

because supposedly primary school starts at six minus years of schooling.

And whatever is left that's supposed to be the years that you were not under six and you not in school.

So those are years of experience. But again, you could have been unemployed, you have been flipping burgers, you could have been working at McKinsey.

You know, it's all counts.

The same time, I think there's not enough work done on how different, different experiences are in terms of accumulating human capital.

Like, for example, people say, gee, you know, a year of experience at a growth lab.

That's real experience, right? Okay.

So then there might be discrimination or other things that you may capture through, uh, um, uh, dummy, uh, gender dummy and ethnicity dummy.

And you can, might put, you know, on an urban dummy, uh, form of vector dummy or an industry dummy or an occupation you have to be.

And then we're going to use a lot migrants as a way of testing for human capital.

These are the other things that are supposedly the migrants were not from here.

So they it's not about this human capital. It's not about this schooling.

It might be about other schooling. So, um, okay, so there are a bunch of, um, econometric issues with this equation.

You know, I hope that in your first year you studied enough of, you know,

the complexity of putting endogenous variables on the right hand side, right?

Because then, uh, you know, um, you know, you will have sample selection bias.

You know, if you are smart, a year of schooling is easy and maybe pleasurable.

If you're dumb, maybe education is very painful.

You don't observe this underlying variable, but it will be correlated with how many years of schooling you obtain,

and you would attribute to the years of schooling this underlying variable that is correlated with years of schooling.

Right? So that's sample selection bias. Labor force participation is not random.

Education is an imperfect variable. A measure of skill experience is often unknown.

That's the formula I told you H minus years of schooling minus six, which is standard in this literature.

And some other variables are choice variables so that you choose the sector, you choose the occupation.

And so it's somewhat endogenous to the whole thing.

So, so it's it's full of um caveats.

But when you apply it to us this is what you obtain okay.

This is running the expected level of wages, keeping some variables constant with years of schooling for Mexico and for us.

So you see that at whatever year of schooling you, we are talking about wages in Japan are lower than in Mexico and the rest of Mexico.

And to get to in the same level of income as Mexican, you need four more years of schooling.

And us. So this is already says, you know, yeah, we could get maybe more, uh, higher average incomes, whatever, with more schooling.

But that's not really what's making us poor controlling for your level of education.

Wages are much lower. You might say, well, maybe it's education and we can control for education and it doesn't change the picture.

But secondly change is on changes. The the difference in schooling between us and the rest of Mexico was three years and now it's two years.

So the gap in schooling has been narrowing. At the same time, the gaps in income have been widening.

So it changes and changes. It doesn't work. You would say, well, why is why is up as further behind the falling behind?

Why is it growing less and the rest of Mexico is it schooling?

Well, schooling is growing faster than the rest of Mexico and the gaps are narrowing.

So it's hard to say. You know, the gaps on income of widening the gaps in schooling are narrowing.

Yes. Could there be a lag effect? So if you go to school now, but going into the labor market five, ten years from now.

Absolutely. So this is years of schooling of the labor force, of the labor force.

But you make a very good point. Yeah. And sometimes you might because you have it you have age.

You can split it by age and look at what's happening to different cohorts.

Okay. So we are going to say asks. We ask the following question is the problem to us?

Or is the problem that Japan equals Japan equals?

Are the people from Japan? Okay. Question.

How would you go about answering the question is it Japan or is it Japan equals?

What? So is it the place or is it the people with it?

Uh, you take someone from Jack a us and move them to another city and see what happens.

Their wages. And how would you do that?

At gunpoint? That's not an option.

Right? So we're going to do exactly that, but we're not going to do it at gunpoint.

We're just going to ask ourselves the question, what happens to the people that left us versus the people who didn't leave us?

Now, you immediately are going to say that what does the what will the so-called identification police going to tell you?

But the people who migrate are not like the people who stay.

Migration is an endogenous choice. So how are you going to know if the people who migrated migrated because they had more human capital, etc., etc.?

So this is the trick we use. Okay.

I'm going to call 100. What? I'm a Mexican.

By the way I'm going to show you. This is also going to be another little lesson.

I'm going to show you a really cool, simple graph.

Okay. And then I'm going to show you an ugly equation that says exactly the same thing.

Okay. But think about it. You know, when you estimate an equation, what does that mean?

And I'm going to show you the equation later. But this is the simple graph that super.

I find it I find it beautiful. So I'm going to call a hundred what a Mexican or non-Japanese Mexican makes in his uh in his or her.

Actually, these are all male.

So we're going to control for years of schooling, quality of education, experience, gender, and whether you are indigenous or or Spanish speaking.

Okay. So I'm going to keep those characteristics constant.

And I'm going to call a non-Japanese Mexican 100. Okay.

Well, when I look at a similar Japanese quote, he makes 59.

That is, if you want it to go call it the call this 60.

If you want it to go from 60 to 100, you would have to go up by 40.

40 over 60 is two thirds. So incomes would have to go up by 67% okay.

In Japan to reach the Mexican average. Okay, now I'm going to compare a Japan who migrated.

But you are going to tell me that's self-selection. Migrants are positively selected.

That's why they migrate. So okay, so I'm going to say let's not compare a Japanese to a Mexican who lives in his state.

That said, let's compare Japan to a Mexican who also migrated out of state.

Okay. Well, Mexican who also migrated out of his state makes 12.8 more.

Okay. So with a total income of 112 okay.

So that would should have been the migrant premium say.

And in this case it's an absolute migrant premium of 12.8.

I could have made it a relative migrant premium since his income was lower.

It should be less than 12.80. But actually the Japan because when they leave Chiapas they make.

109. Which means and this is statistically indistinguishable from 112,

because Japan outside of Japan, is indistinguishable from a Mexican outside of a state.

So this kind of suggests that the problem is Japan's, not Japan.

And these answers about human capital suggest that the problem was somewhat in the individual and not in the place.

If you fix the individual in the place, would would approve.

Okay. Yes. Does it control where, uh, the Japanese are migrating?

In this case, no. In this case, no. But it's a good question.

Emigrating inside Mexico. Right inside Mexico. Because if it's outside Mexico, we lose them.

Yes. They're migrating inside Mexico. Okay.

So that's the ugly equation. Okay.

So. So years of schooling is here.

It's about 9% experience. Experience squared a female dummy.

Look these female dummies are huge. Females make 33% less than males.

Indigenous language. They make 26% less them than Spanish.

Spanish? People's Spanish is their their mother tongue.

Born in Japanese, they make 35%. 40% less.

Okay. Migrants in general make 12.8 more migrants interacted with dropouts.

They make 37% more. Okay. And years of schooling and Chiapas.

The returns are a little bit higher in Chiapas, if anything. But but the numbers are small experience.

No. Mhm. Essentially. And female in Japanese they actually make more than in the rest of Mexico and indigenous in Japan they make them.

Slightly less than in the rest of Mexico. So that's the actual equation we ran.

Okay. So now to explain the economic significance of that equation.

This is a nicer way to present. So you see the 12.8 came came from here.

Uh, migrant times Japanese came from here. Right.

It's a good. Yes.

Um, if you control for Argentina controlling for cost of living,

if cost of living within Chiapas is significantly lower, so that it doesn't actually impact link census.

But it's a very good good question. We don't um, in this literature.

So the argument is if a firm so if I'm a firm, I still need to be able to pay your wage.

So I would still equalize the marginal product of labor to your wage.

And then if it's a more expensive place,

I would hire fewer people or whatever until my marginal product of labor is equal to whatever higher wage I need to pay.

But you make a good point because it goes to the issue of spatial equilibrium.

Um, one of the typical things that happens with migrants is that they leave, but they don't bring their family with them,

because the price of consumption at the home village is lower than, say, in town.

So you say you spend less in housing in town, you send more remittances.

And so.

So we saw a lot of that in, in South Africa where, where, uh, these migrants, uh, just move 1 or 2 members of a family and send remittances back home.

And that's sort of like what you see in us. Good.

So in some, uh,

looking at quantities and quantities are indicate this quantities or years of schooling significantly lowering us in quality below average.

But uh, uh, not that bad in math.

Um. We use Mensa regressions to check for prices for returns to schooling.

I am. So we found that adjusted wages are lower than in the rest of Mexico for all education levels.

Um, uh, differences were not much affected after controlling for quality or quality did not help solve the puzzle.

In schooling, gaps have been falling, income gaps have been rising,

and internal migrants were telling us people educated in us who migrate and are indistinguishable.

So they seem to be. If there are somewhere else, better find in our in our language.

In our language, we would say maybe the problem might be consistent with not the level of schooling, but the diversity of schooling.

So if you think of Scrabble and this is a Scrabble game, you are the letter L.

And if everybody in town is the letter L, there aren't too many words you can make with just one letter L,

but if you move and you go to places that have many other letters,

your letter L can go into many words and as a consequence, you can match yourself better in other places that have more diversity of letters.

So your human capital is worth more over there than over here.

So the problem is not in what letter you are, but in what they versity of letters are around you.

Okay. What have been compatible with. We've had story.

Now you might say, um, is this, uh is this what the word looks like in general?

So we did work on Japanese. We worked on a bunch of other places.

The last competitor, Baja California. And in the city of atmosphere where we are currently working.

And in the city of Hermosillo, we run exactly the same.

The same equation, except that the Japanese, the people from Hermosillo, when they migrate out, they lose.

They don't make more money. They lose money. So so it's not that everybody, you know, when you interact,

if you get the same result in the case later, we'll see you a those that migrate actually lose out.

So you you would expect them not to want to migrate too much.

Okay. So so that's case one. Yeah.

And I would like to know how do you think about like terms of all of this test.

Because I'm thinking that he got disappeared. When we convert those who migrate from different differentiate.

But how can we also say that that's also true for those who didn't read?

Em. So the external validity is good in when you're making a statement about an experiment saying,

I did an experiment in Guatemala where I give kids a multivitamin and compliments, and it had a big impact.

And what would happen if I gave multivitamin compliments in Norway?

Say, well, I don't know. I mean, probably Norwegians are well-fed kids.

They have plenty of vitamins. They don't need extra multivitamins.

So. So externally, it wouldn't be valid here.

I'm not making that kind of causal statement.

I'm just finding symptomatically I would expect that if the problem was that schools in your town were particularly lousy, right?

That the way that that would be reflected is that when you try to get a job out of town,

the market will not recognize you as having ten years of schooling.

You'll think that you only actually have the equivalent of six.

And I would expect you to be earning less. Right.

And the so so in.

If that's not the case, then it makes a statement about how significant was the quality of schooling in the determination of wages.

So it's a simple. Symptoms are different from causal explanations.

Okay. I can infer that you have a cold because you have a fever.

It doesn't mean that the fever caused the cold.

It's that if you were to have a cold.

I mean, a fever is, uh, is not a sufficient condition to have a cold.

Right. But it's, uh, may be a necessary condition for you to have a cold.

Okay, so. So, yes. You have a cold. Maybe you have something else.

A runny nose. Maybe you have some other things. So. So it doesn't have.

We're not we're not making causal statements.

You're making, ehm, correlational statements that would be implied if something was a binding constraint.

You're saying if you have a cold, I should observe a fever?

No, it's not that fevers in themselves cause a cold or anything or, you know.

So, so it's it's diagnostic.

It's not causal. Okay. Let me tell you a story about Panama.

So Panama and this is a picture of Panama. Panama City in a it is it has been together with the Dominican Republic, the fastest growing.

Country in the Americas. Um, it was pretty stagnant until, uh, they transferred, um, the sovereignty over the canal in 1997, I think.

And since then, they kind of, like, got their act together and they did a bunch of things.

And the economy has been growing by leaps and bounds. And a lot of it is construction, but a lot, a lot of it is is in services.

Obviously they have the canal, so they play a role in logistics and stuff like that.

In nonresidential construction was big transport and communications, financial services and so on.

And these tend to be relatively high skilled industries.

So this is the percentage requiring a college degree from employment in these different industries.

Okay. And some of them requiring all 50% or so college degrees.

So these are relatively high skilled services. Now Panama.

And it has. A relatively in a high skilled supply of of I mean schooling indicators are relatively good and but quality indicators are horrible.

And we only have the Pisa for 2010 because the standard for Latin America they think the Pisa exam,

they do very poorly and then they stop taking it and that's why.

So if you have a fever, break the thermometer here.

So um, now, um, when the Panama Canal was, the, um, sovereignty was reverted.

The Americans use the Panama Canal, uh, to for military purposes.

They wanted to assure the security of the canal. So the western part of the canal, they put a military base in the eastern part of the canal.

They put another military base.

And these were sort of U.S. sovereignty when they reverted, you know, the Panamanians had to decide, what the [INAUDIBLE] do we do with this area?

So they started to create special economic zones. And one of them was, uh, the City of Knowledge surveyor.

Another one was, um, they passed a headquarters law that if you moved your headquarters to Panama, you would not be taxed on the, uh,

profits of your company generated elsewhere, but only on the activities in Panama, which as headquarters, they don't make profit.

They're a cost center. So essentially, it was very good tax treatment.

And they created, um. Um, um, and uh, um, uh, a special economic zone called Panama Pacifico.

And these are going to be important for us because they're going to exempt, um, Panama.

They're going to exempt people who locate there from their immigration restrictions.

So it's going to be a way to test the binding ness of immigration restrictions.

So if you locate in those places, you don't you don't need, um, to abide by some of the restrictions.

And because of that, the headquarters law attracted all of these companies to put their regional headquarters in Panama.

And these are some of the some of the characteristics of these, uh, of these uh,

regions in terms of tax exemptions or, uh, visas or what kinds of exemptions you have from labor force.

But what we were really interested in, there's a law in Panama that restricts, um,

foreign employees to 10% of your, of the, of your labor force and 10% of your wage bill.

And those restrictions were lifted for the special economic zone.

So it was an opportunity to to find out a little bit about.

So, uh, so outside of special economic zones is 6.7% of employees are foreigners, are migrants.

But inside the special economic zones, the number was not 80% or 70% was 16%, but 16% is more than the mandated 10%.

So um, um, and migrants were 15% say in educated migrants were 15%, rather than, say, 4.5%.

Now here is the result of the dummies on wages.

If you are a foreigner, okay, how much more do you earn in an industry if you are, if you're a foreigner?

So this is the value of the name of the foreign dummy.

The value of the foreign dummy is 50%. So all of these are positive premiums.

Foreigners make more money than Panamanians in Panama. Okay.

But in some industries, you know, they make 70% more or 80% more.

So. So this is by industry and this is by occupation.

Across the board, foreigners make more money than Panamanians.

And we wondered why the [INAUDIBLE] would foreigners, controlling for everything else make more money than Panamanians?

And and it must be. Why would companies be willing to pay foreigners more than they're willing to pay Panamanians, by the way?

In many countries, you don't observe this. You observe the opposite.

You observe that foreigners earn less than locals because, you know, they might have the education, but it's not certified.

So they cannot work in their professions, etc., etc. so when you do find numbers, you find fractions of this.

And these foreigners are overrepresented in this.

This is, you know, odds ratios, you know, what's the share of immigrants in the occupation over the share of everybody in the occupation,

over the share of nonimmigrant in the occupation? Okay. And so one means that the shares are equal above one's means that they're overrepresented.

So it's clear that foreigners are being hired for the more high skilled activities.

Okay. So this suggests that immigration is a way around the constraint.

If there's an inadequate supply of labor, you know, you might be able to go around that inadequate supply of labor by bringing people from abroad.

So that's why I find migration to be very informative of a potential good symptom of a constraint.

Right. And by the way, in many countries, for example, when we worked on Jordan.

And you might think that countries are typically either importers of labor or exporters of labor.

But what was very interesting about Jordan is that they were importing low skilled labor.

So all farm workers were either from Egypt or from Pakistan or Bangladesh.

And then you have all the high skilled workers working in the Gulf, not in Jordan.

So so they might be importing at one skill level and exporting at another skill level.

And that, that kind of like suggests that them, you know, what are the balances of supply and demand.

Good. No. So.

Then we asked ourselves the question, uh, are these migrant workers helping or hurting Panamanians?

So, um. How would you go about asking yourself a question?

Ehm. Ah. You know, you know, the old story is that if foreigners are compliments of Panamanians, compliments are things like coffee and sugar.

Substitutes are things like coffee and tea.

So the more coffee you have, the more sugar you want, versus the more coffee you have, the less tea you want.

So you'd want to know if I if I were to relax more the immigration of foreigners.

Would that lower the demand for Panamanians or would that raise the demand for Panamanians?

Okay. How would you go about testing for that?

I mean, it's unfair because we were thinking about this for much longer than, I mean, giving you time to think about.

But we had this population census and we split Panama into whatever geographical units the census allowed us to,

to split it and whatever industry classifications, the census allowed us to split it.

So we we're looking within location industry cells to ask ourselves the question,

what happened to the wages of Panamanians in location industry cells that had more foreigners

controlling for location fixed effects and controlling for industry fixed effects?

So this is really about the interaction of in this location industry having more foreigners.

Okay. And this is what we found.

We found that in general, ehm, Panamanians that worked with more immigrants earn more.

Okay. And the effect was bigger for low skilled.

I mean. Uh, for low skilled immigrants, the the effect was essentially zero,

but was particularly good for low skilled Panamanians, not for high school Panamanians and for high skilled immigrants.

We found that the effects were positive across across the board, and it was good for low skilled Panamanians.

It was good for high skilled Panamanians. So this was kind of like our test of saying if the country were to relax.

So we our story was human capital is constraining growth in Panama.

The short term solution.

I'm going to whether the short term solution would be a relaxation of the immigration constraints and that this would be a positive for Panamanians.

That was essentially the argument that here's a country that has opted for development strategy that is very focused on high skilled activities.

Let me tell you a little bit more about that. So the Americans wanted to use the canal as just as if it was the sea.

So people just go through it. They they don't want them to stop there, etc.

So things that the Panamanians started, now that we're in control, we're going to put ports on the, on the Pacific side, ports on the Atlantic side.

We're going to put logistic centers. We're going to provide them with financial services.

And since we are already here, you know, we're going to bring these multinational corporations, they they developed, uh, everybody has airports.

They happen to develop a super successful airline that developed the hub and spoke strategy, Copa Airlines.

So a a little bit like Denver that we discussed in a previous lecture, Panama is the hub of of that network.

So if you put your regional headquarters in Panama, you have direct flights to many locations, right.

And then you develop finance. They had an offshore financial center, etc., etc.

So that was their strategy. That strategy is very intensive and high skilled workers.

And so that strategy was naturally going to bump against their supply of high

skilled workers in a context where they had very restrictive immigration laws,

very restrictive immigration laws, except in, as I like to say, Panama closes the door on immigration but opens windows in the third floor.

So if you can get if you can climb over the walls, you can get to a third floor.

Right. But um, and the idea is that this constraint in human capital is being expressed, reflected in this willingness to pay a lot for foreigners.

And, and that when you get those foreigners, you see growth enough growth to increase the demand for locals and increase their wages.

Go ahead. And I was very curious about this because you look especially economic zone.

And you mentioned that one of the main advantage for this multinational companies is tax advantage.

And I just wanted to have parallel with Switzerland, because we have a lot of these tax breaks for months and national.

And it often comes with, um, you know, um, demand to have a minimum number of people being employed, uh, on, on the territory.

And I would assume, at least in is the case that you have a lot of managerial position, uh,

more than other kind of skills, that there's not so much production, uh, if you want happening in these countries.

So they're the cases are different because you have hired, know highly educated.

So I like very little of education.

So I would assume that in Switzerland that you can have like benefits from the population because they can also source from local universities.

So there is so in Panama, I would assume that, you know, as you have to higher minimum, I'm assuming I'm not sure with our degree.

But as you have told me, when people and they have to be in some sort of managerial position, you have to get this position.

If you can't have it locally from abroad, and you have to get these people at the premium because you have to move the labor from a different place.

So I was just wondering if that you would take into account in your diagnostic. Well, I mean.

It's interesting that that is the case in many, in many places.

Um, companies have to attract their maybe their information, their IT manager or their CFO from somewhere else and they have to pay a premium.

But to tell you the truth, I've never seen premiums this lot this large.

So it was suggestive. That got ehm, it was hard to source locally.

Um, but yeah, but I interesting the comparison to Switzerland.

Yeah. Yeah. I was wondering in the last graph why the increase in the incomes for and low

skill premiums is higher when the immigrants are those kids in high school?

This country, maybe with some sort of patience between the immigrants and the Panamanians?

Yeah. It's, um. Your testing, my memory.

I remember thinking about it, and I. But I, um, I don't recall right now.

Um, there was a lot of construction activity at the time, and construction was particularly high wage, low, low, low education.

And it was actually, um, an important avenue out of, out of poverty.

A lot of people migrating into Panama City from the rest of Panama earning these construction wages.

And there was a very clear path for skill acquisition on the job in construction.

Construction plays for Panama. What manufacturing is supposed to have played elsewhere?

Um, it's also there big wage differences depending on your skill level within the industry.

And you can grow into those skill levels, uh, with experience.

So, um, it, it could be that the interaction was somewhat, you know, um, you lift a restriction that facilitates more construction.

For example, you allow more foreigners in high skilled foreigners.

They want fancy homes, they need office space, etc. that generates a boom in construction.

And the booming construction is where you get your jobs for the for the local people.

So that's where the complementarities arise.

Anyway. Let me. We also did this cool graph.

This is the share of high skilled immigrants in the labor force.

Uh, and this is the, uh, Industry Complexity Index.

And we found a positive relationship between how many foreigners you have and, and how complex is your industry.

So your ability to get into more complex industries is related with your ability to hire foreign workers.

Now, the problem in Panama is that, uh, they want to model themselves in Singapore, and Singapore has 45% foreigners and they are at 4.7% foreigners.

So they're a 10th of the foreign intensity. And by the way, at 4.7%, this is like top 1 or 2 political issues in Panama.

Um, if you like. Ehm, we are super controversial in Panama because we said that they are too restrictive on immigration and so on.

When the politics is saying that they're not sufficiently restrictive on immigration.

Um, but anyway, so this is all the tests we ran.

So, uh, you know, we looked at quantity, quality.

So quantity was good, quality was bad. Shadow prices.

We look for foreign migrant premiums too, as an indicator of,

you know what what skills are in short supply locally and how much are they willing to pay for them in very high wage foreign premium.

So when when they created these special economic zones and so on, that lifted the restriction.

We saw growth, acceleration. Uh, we saw many agents trying to bypass the constraint in their, um, you know, many,

many of these higher skill activities attracting more foreigners and foreigners being overrepresented in high school occupations.

So, so that's what, uh, what, uh, what we, what we did there.

So you see, uh, diagnostic is really not one test.

It's many tests. And after you put the many test, you want to give some overarching interpretation that makes sense of the whole thing.

Yes. Marcelo. Yeah. I have a question about like the income inequality because here I've seen that, um,

having made foreigners getting more higher wages kind of draw you draws up also the curve for the locals.

But I, I'm thinking about my country in other like countries in Africa where I've been where

sometimes it just like increases the income gap between the foreigners and the locals.

So we have to assume in that case that relaxing, uh, immigration conditions and requirements would not be the situation or like the right move.

Well, in. We're going to be discussing inequality next lecture in sometime next week.

But then. Yeah. Um, I would, I would I don't know what might happen to Gini coefficient.

They might go up. But I don't know if that would be a, the sufficient statistic to decide if it's good or bad.

Right. Because if um, that's why we checked what happened to the income of the Panamanians.

If a, if it lifts the overall activity, overall income, overall demand, overall wages of the locals,

then, uh, whatever happens to a genie is this kind of like second, uh, second order?

So a. A I can it's very hard.

It's very hard to generate prosperity in a place without having inequality go up.

Um, it's very hard because the typical thing that's going to happen is that as the economy accelerates,

there's going to be increased demand for for labor.

Maybe that increased demand for labor is going to bump against some constraints, maybe a higher level of skill.

So returns to schooling are going to go up. And the higher the returns to schooling the more inequality.

Because if returns to schooling are zero.

Inequality in education doesn't map into inequalities in income because their returns are zero.

The higher the returns to education, the higher the inequality generated by whatever inequality in education you have.

So that mechanism is going to make it hard for you to to get into a growth path that does not have these,

you know, some people moving faster than others.

Um, and so if society doesn't have an appetite for tolerating that increased inequality, um, you may end up in a bad equilibrium.

Good. So we have the camels and hippos, the idea.

Right. As you know that if if the problem is lack of water, you are supposed to see camels are not hippos, right?

And because camels are very good at managing water, and hippos want to live in water.

Right? Um, so, um.

So you want to have a variable which is sort of like the human capital intensity or the schooling intensity of occupation in an industry.

And you would expect that as human capital is a constraint.

You would have underrepresentation of skill intensive industries.

But if you have human capital not being the constraint, you shouldn't observe, uh, constraints in skill intensive industries, a relative constraint.

Okay. So, um, so we're going to run this type of regression.

This is, uh, this is, uh, the intensity of an industry in a location and for a municipality, in this case, in industry municipality.

So the share of an industry in a municipality is going to be related to the share of that industry in general.

The share a share of, you know, some municipality characteristic, uh, you know, how big is that municipality and an interaction term,

which that's interaction term is a how intense the intensity of the industry in whatever it is that we're testing,

for example, in this case, schooling, the intensity of the industry and the schooling interacted by the with, um, the uh, uh, municipality dummy.

This this dummy. Okay, so are the industries that are more intensive in education overrepresented or underrepresented in this municipality?

Okay. Is that clear? Okay, so we did this for, uh, for not municipalities, but countries.

And and we found that skill intensive industries are underrepresented in Chile and in Brazil, but not different from zero.

These are the confidence intervals. And they are underrepresented in in in South Africa.

While at the same time, we found that capital intensive industries are overrepresented in South Africa.

Um. So this is, you would say in, in South Africa, some evidence of skills shortages and and capital abundance.

South Africa has the best financial system of any developing world.

And people complain about scale. So I don't know why the error terms are so large in in Chile.

Maybe you can work on them on better estimates of it, but this is an example of using camels and hippos to to to answer the question.

Okay. So final case in Sri Lanka.

Okay. We worked on Sri Lanka some years ago.

Um. Sri Lanka had had a 28 year, uh, or so civil war.

The Civil war ended this year here. And it was immediately followed by this growth acceleration, kind of a think of it as a peace dividend.

But it was immediately followed by this slowdown. And when they hired us.

They were growing on this, uh, 4% rate. But it was you know, it's one.

Now you might say, well, okay, so let's test for human capital.

So what's the percentage of the labor force that has tertiary education very long,

by the way, in, in, uh, in Sri Lanka almost everybody has secondary schooling.

But tertiary schooling is relatively low. And the people with tertiary education have a ridiculously high unemployment rate.

So you would say, well, there have very few people of tertiary education, but the few people have tertiary education.

They have have very high rates of unemployment. So.

And this is the percentage of firms identifying an inadequately educated workforce as a major constraint on on their companies using the labor force.

Done. Enterprise survey of the world Bank.

Okay. And here we find that they complain very little about about an inadequate labor force.

And in addition,

we can run a returns to schooling equations like the mental regressions we just talked about and the returns to tertiary education in Sri Lanka.

Is this line here or not only low but falling.

A. And. And not only that, but a a so so this was the returns to education in 2009.

This is the return to education in 2012, even though this was a boom period.

So the returns to tertiary education were not going up in spite of a boom.

Okay. And and this came from a survey done to foreign firms that express interest in investing in Sri Lanka.

This was given to us by their Bureau of Investments. And they said, you know, proximity to markets or to customers was very important.

Domestic market growth potential was important.

Skilled workforce availability was important for them as a determinants of why they wanted to invest in Sri Lanka.

So they were not saying bad things about that.

You know, when we look at at the at growth in Sri Lanka, we find that the thing that is lagging growth is export growth.

We had the lowest export growth of all the comparator countries.

Ehm. And while there had been a lot of transformation in their export basket that had happened in the 1990s,

regarding to garments since the 1990s was essentially a stagnant export basket.

So the monkeys were not jumping. Okay, so this, for example, was Sri Lanka's exports in 1995.

And Sri Lanka's exports. Now, you see, there's kind of like more or less the same thing.

And this is Vietnam's exports in 1995 look somewhat similar.

And where I am doing arms exports now,

you see that this whole and according to all of this electronics cluster that didn't happen in, in uh, in Sri Lanka.

So. In Sri Lanka's export basket shows low economic complexity relative to comparators.

This is their export basket split into a by product complexity index.

So 76% of their exports are are in the lowest quintile of product complexity compared to the others.

Very few higher complexity products. And this is another way of organizing the data.

We asked ourselves a in our export basket by vintage.

By vintage. When did this product get into the export basket of Sri Lanka or in every country?

So and so when did they make it into into the export basket.

And you see that a m a the red parts are relatively recent products.

And in in the comparator countries the recent products represent a much higher share of exports than in Sri Lanka.

Okay. So. So other countries kind of like learn to become good at more complex products and more of them.

And the novelty in exports was adding to the overall growth of exports.

Okay. So. So we're saying is it missing schooling or missing jumpy ness of the monkeys?

Okay, so you say, look, for some reason the Sri Lankan Sri Lanka is not learning how to make more things,

but not necessarily because of low, low, low schooling.

So. Um.

If we define human capital as something that an individual has that makes his or her hour of work more productive,

you know that that's what human capital is. It's not obvious that years of schooling or quality adjusted years of schooling is your best metric.

It's, uh, just the fact that it has become standard in this literature does not necessarily mean that it is the most significant.

The easiest way to get to it, relativity depends on complementarity.

So, um, when you're testing for schooling, we're assuming that it's something that you learned in school that is missing in, in the economy.

But, you know, I've spent more time in school than probably anybody, right?

I don't know how to make shoes. I don't know how to make garments.

I don't know how to make medicines. I don't know how to make anything. So the idea that, you know, I could teach things that I'm not experienced.

And so the idea that the education system can substitute for on the job acquisition of skills is completely,

you know, out of it, and you cannot have experience in industries that don't exist.

Right. Um, and so if human capital or lack of schooling is the binding constraint, you would expect high wage premium to skilled labor.

We would expect that skill intensive firms should have trouble growing because they are the camels.

They are the hippos. They could be going around the constraint by importing talent.

That's why.

