[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
It's something that. You can take away.

Yeah. Yeah, yeah.

Because, you know, I think nobody loves.

You. Yeah. Yeah.

They got to have. A backup.

In order to have to stop working for us.

That's why I don't. That's why we are in the summer.

Yeah. The weather is very different. Yeah.

I'm different today than it was in my head.

It's hard. Yeah. Not too cold to call.

When I get home. Are you joining them, though?

No. Okay. Which one are you? I think we're they're planning to use Myrtle for the house for a while.

It's hard. So interesting. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah. So we're doing it today, right?

It's going great. I think we will have a good front.

Yeah. What are you reading? I'm so sorry about this.

Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's not that much, actually. It's, uh.

Like, as long as, you know, this is.

Another one is, um. When I was growing up in this country.

We would have a lot of a lot of lecture.

Talks about the labor market. Um, so we're asking ourselves the question, is there something wrong with the labor market in the country?

Uh, quite the problem. How would you go about diagnosing?

Okay. So before we go there, let me just remind you two housekeeping things.

That there will be a lecture this Friday. I'm back sharing this Friday, my new lecture last two days on great aim and problem set is due tomorrow.

Conference at three is due tomorrow, so I'm sure it escaped your memory.

Good. All right. So today we're going to talk labor markets.

So I'm going to begin with, uh, a long list of definitions that are useful when you do these numbers.

The first one is, you know, in something called employment status.

Okay. So when they classify people in terms of what type of relationship we have with the labor market, you can either be an employer.

So people use that variable to measure things like entrepreneurship and so on.

So so you have a boss, you are hiring other people or you are a wage earner.

So you are employed by somebody and they are supposed to pay you a wage.

And you might want to know if this is a formal labor contract or an informal labor contract.

But then there are some a really easy and convenient definition.

And that is, uh, you might be unemployed. Okay.

No, I mean, you might be self-employed. So you are working for yourself.

So you have no nobody to pay you a wage. You are.

You are your own man. You're your own entrepreneur, your own business.

Right? Maybe you can think of it as a one person by the economy.

Right. And and then you can be unemployed.

Unemployed is, um, is a complicated, somewhat unfortunate definition,

because the definition of unemployed is somebody who wants to work, can't find work.

Statistically, that's complicated to define, but what does it mean to want to work, you know.

So they ask, you know, have you been actively seeking a job in the last two weeks or so?

And, and and there are in some of the.

Different ways of asking that question, and this is somewhat different answers.

So for example, in South Africa we're going to talk about the we have two definitions of how actively you seeking job uh employment.

And that gives you gives two very different numbers for employment.

Okay. So some people in order to ask you questions of, uh, you know, are you unemployed or out of labor force?

Instead of asking, what's the rate of unemployment? They ask, what is the rate of employment?

And that excludes either the people who didn't want to work and people who did want to work but couldn't find a job.

Okay. So it's important to make some of these distinctions.

And a non-active person is somebody who's not employed and is not looking for a job.

Right. That's then there's something called the working age population.

According to that definition, I shouldn't be working.

And then there is the prime age people.

So supposedly, okay, that's most of you.

And then there's the youth, which goes from 15 to 24.

And the youth presumably are, you know, either in college or in high school or whatever right now.

So the labor force is the people of the working part of the working age population that either works or is looking for work.

Labor force participation is the percentage of a working age population.

That is, if you are employed or unemployed or looking for work and they have one or goal, the employment rate is what I was telling you before.

Sometimes also called the activity rate is the working age population is employed divided by the working age population.

Whether you are looking for a job or not okay, the unemployment rate is the opposite, right?

It is a percentage of the working age population that is not employed either because they don't want to or because it can be.

Unemployment rate is I want to just go here.

And the informality rate is the percentage of the labor force that is either

self employed and working families or micro firms outside of the labor quota.

So we're going to find informality in the next slide.

That is essentially a labor relationship that is not regulated by the Labor Code.

Okay. Sometimes people define informality as something to do with not paying taxes,

but that might be about informal firms more than about informal workers or more workers.

Okay. Typically, for example, in household surveys they would ask if we have Social Security, do we have health insurance?

Do you have something that the labor Code mandates?

Um, and so you may have it or not, that's one way of giving up informally.

Okay. Okay. So let me give you now some stylized facts, okay?

Okay. The share of salaried workers as a share, uh, and employers as a share of the working age population.

It goes up with a level of development. This is what Marx thought was going to happen.

You know, one of the predictions that Marx made was that, um, in the world of, uh,

of shopkeepers and artisans and so on was going to be substituted by a world of capitalist firms where the owners owned the means of production,

and they hired the workers in exchange for a wage. That was going to happen.

And he was looking towards the future. And he, you can say, was Marx right or wrong?

Well, it happened relatively quickly in the developed world.

It hasn't happened in the developing world. Okay.

So the idea that production was going to be organized by capitalist firms that would hire people for a wage that covers,

I don't know, 50% of Latin Americans, 10% of Americans.

Okay. So so, um, this is I'm mentioning these stylized facts because whenever you're going to look at your country, A,

you might think that something looks weird because it's different from the US or it's different from whatever.

But here you really want to condition for kind of like the level of the government.

There are some expectations that you would have as to what it is normal to observe.

Okay. So this is the first interesting result. The second interesting result is that self-employment, which is.

He goes down with the level of development. Okay.

So these one person by firms, uh, you know, tend to become less significant as you increase the level of.

Uh, agricultural workers also decline as a share of the labor force with the level of development.

We saw that in picture one. And this industry tends to go up when the level of development up to a point and services only go up.

I really hate this classification of services because it's kind of like none of the above, I think.

Okay, so it mixes, you know, things that you would never mix, like, uh, a dentist and,

uh, and a barber and a retailer insurance company and a banker or whatever.

Right now it is the case that typically unemployment is not a phenomenon of poor countries.

It's typically a phenomenon of middle income countries. And, uh, where you have enormous variances in the middle.

Um, a it is a phenomenon in high income countries.

So unemployment is. Yeah.

And if you if you tell me unemployment is not a problem in Africa, it doesn't surprise me.

Unemployment is not a problem in Mexico. It is a problem in South Africa.

So in the middle of it, in the middle. I don't know where Mexico is here, but it has very low rates of unemployment.

And South Africa has the highest rate of unemployment for now.

In one constant across the world is that the youth tend to face higher rates of unemployment, um, and the average.

Okay, so here's the rate of unemployment.

You know, total unemployment in here is a rate of youth unemployment.

That's a 45 degree line. Everybody's above the 45 degree line.

So if you tell me, oh we have high unemployment this low, but unemployment of youth is higher.

Well, kind of like that's par for the course. That's what you would expect.

You know, in the young people don't have too many on the job skills acquired.

They it's very hard for them to signal what skills they do have or not.

So typically you find higher rates of unemployment among the youth.

Harder to explain is why do we typically observe higher rates of unemployment for women?

And then one of the examples I'm going to share on on Thursday, we're going to see very, very high rates of unemployment for women.

And Jordan. And we're going to see what they've done on it and try to understand why the [INAUDIBLE].

Okay. So this is the percentage of the non-active population?

Typically, yes. What why do we focus in unemployment rate instead of non employment rate.

Being. He the non.

I mean the public talks about the unemployment rate and there is a definitional problem and these are your country.

It doesn't really matter because people are going to look at the time series and ask is is it high or low relative to us under a constant definition.

So people might worry about the unemployment rate in some countries and then throw in the international comparisons.

You might doubt whether people are being people that are normally classified as non-active in one country,

are classified as employed, and unemployment in the other country.

So it might create some noise. But I would say, you know,

if you if the definition of unemployment has been relatively stable over time and you have no big qualms about how it is being defined,

and you want to know, is it high or low relative to past experience?

Is it going up or down? Sounds like an interesting thing to look at.

If you the rate of non-active population tends to go up in the middle off in middle income countries.

And that's typically I mean, there's I don't know what's going on in each one of these countries.

But one typical phenomenon is that women have very high labor force participation rates in rural areas and much lower in urban areas.

So initial phases of urbanization implies declines in female labor force participation that eventually are, uh, recovered.

So you tend to see this in this story. Okay.

This is. So if you think the people who are not in the formal sector.

Okay arm in.

And. So the people who are not in the formal sector can either be in self-employment or in unemployed.

Right. In in developing countries, they tend to choose self-employment.

In rich countries they tend to choose unemployment. So unemployment really is kind of like, uh, a rich country problem, right?

Countries, people in in Spain, people cannot afford to be unemployed.

They might actually enjoy being unemployed because they get a, you know, significant income for not working.

Right. So so typically this is the unemployed or unemployed has a shall be available labor force that is has to go up with, uh, the level of income.

And that's typically because the either because there is unemployment compensation

or simply because there are formal jobs that you aspire to get into.

And you are kind of searching and waiting to see where you get one of those better jobs.

Okay. Okay. So the general stylized facts of the labor market across countries is that poor countries

have smaller form of sectors where the most people generally work as self-employed,

either in agriculture or in urban activities. Okay. So it's characterized by a one person bite department.

And you have to ask yourself, you know, what are the things that you can produce working on your own, right.

You're not going to make x ray machines. You're not going to be making antibiotics, right.

You're typically going to be in retail or some kind of service or.

You know, structural transformation and usually brings with it more activities that are organized in

the formal or informal sector tends to expand because they need to have more person bias.

Okay. So typically you get more formal employment Vis-a-vis self-employment.

That's a variable that's going to be changing with the level of development.

And it's a variable that you might want to introduce, you know, in which direction it's going.

And I'm going to compare two companies in a couple of slides.

During this process of structural transformation, female labor force participation first declines with urbanization.

And then it goes back up again, um,

as there are more formal workers in households and those that are not formally employed

choose to be unemployed rather than in the informal sector as as the government confirms.

And one big implication is that it would seem that the bad labor outcomes we see in many

developing countries are a consequence of where they are in the development process.

So a lot of it is related to the demand for labor products more than, you know, labor market institution problems.

So this yes, the information available in the growth of about unpaid can work for example about what um better

work well in that that's that's usually sort of the work of women in in European countries.

A household surveys often ask a question that allows you to classify that in not in every country, but in.

A not typically women homemakers who stay at home and just take care of their home.

There is something in in the household survey in Colombia which is called a UMTS familiarize.

So these are kind of family businesses and you are in the family and you help the

business and they are might or might not be paid because you've got family businesses,

the income of the family okay. Okay.

So there are some jobs may not be caused by labor market dysfunctions, okay.

By the labor market not operating. Well, it may be because of something else in our operating world showing up in the labor market.

Typically we think a binding constraint is something that constraint supply not being there.

If something is constraining demand, it must be something else that is constraining the supply of some company.

Okay, so I always want you to remember this very, very important phrase.

All the important phrases were either said by Mark Twain or by Yogi Berra.

Okay, I don't know who said this one, but just because the tire is not at the bottom does not mean that.

A whole is there. This is very important because typically,

and especially in these days where a the development field has been taken over by by donors who want to feel self-important.

And they say, what's the problem? The problem is high youth unemployment.

Let's do some program for youth unemployment. Right.

And the youth unemployment might be a symptom of a problem that is somewhere else.

That's right. And that's that's um, and you know, the question is, are you hitting symptoms or are you hitting the causes and so on.

So the idea is that if you see the tire flat here, you want to do something here, but, you know, the order might be anywhere in the tire.

Um, there. So so this is an important insight.

Okay. So. One one way in which people have thought about this problem.

And I'm going to talk about two basic. Models and the Lewis model.

And then I'm going to talk about the Harris Todaro model. You've seen raise your hand if you've seen the Harris federal model.

There's one on one. Okay.

By the way, that Harris is Kamala's father.

She never talks about his father. Her father. He says Stanford professor for many years.

So he's, like, going to college, huh? Didn't Trump say it's like a Marxist scholar?

Well, yeah. Not not I would classify him as Marxist, but, um.

Anyway. So. Okay.

Yeah. Is that in? There is a say.

Somebody sets a so there's here is employment in the market sector.

Here is employment and recreational sector. Think of the modern sector as, I don't know, manufacturing.

Think of the private sector as agriculture. Okay.

So this is before the labor force. Um, the idea is.

That for some reason, wages in the modern sector are set not to be lower than this,

whether it's by rules, regulations or simply the higher cost of of living in urban areas or whatever,

it's something is keeping the wages of the formal sector here at that wage, a, uh, informal sector, the agricultural sector.

You know, it's going to have there's it's not going to be able to hire that many workers and you're going to have surplus labor.

So the idea is that these economies were characterized by surplus labor until the modern sector becomes big enough that it absorbs this excess thing,

and then it starts, you know, it's a good starting point and then it starts moving up here.

Um, so, so wages go up, the agricultural sector shrinks and down.

In this period you're just absorbing excess labor.

And this is, uh, a really striking image of a comparison between India and Vietnam.

Okay. This is the percentage of wage earners as a share of total income.

And you see that India is a country that has been growing by leaps and bounds, rising India, etc., etc.

A the share of formal employment is ridiculously low in India,

ridiculously low by Vietnamese standards, which started in very similar position in 1991.

But a lot of the growth has been in the growth of a form of employment that hasn't happened in in India.

Some people would argue that that's because India has the most ridiculously restrictive forms of formal employment.

Um, so that might be there might be, uh, a sidebar or a dissertation there.

No. So remember the tricks I played in the first lecture where I asked myself the question, uh, what has happened?

You know, in the world, increase in education and improve incomes according to those regression lines.

So I'm doing here the same thing.

I'm asking, what's the relationship between GDP per capita and wage and, you know, formal employment as a share of the working age population.

And it is the case that the curve has been moving sort of like in this direction.

So now I the same level of income, you have fewer wage earners than before.

Um, and at the lower levels of income you have fewer a the.

At these middle levels of income, we have more self than before.

So there might be some some things that are moving against the formal employment relative to the past.

The same increases in the GDP per capita are not translating into the same increases in Formula One.

Yes. Unlikely question. The jobs that are made through these ups like Uber or and.

Yeah, but then stuff that are like permanent limit or I don't know behind.

That's uh, that's a very good question. That's a very good question.

And in. The gig economy a depending on I mean, there's a real question.

How would you think about them. How about these jobs? And second is, you know, how would it be captured by statistics.

So one reason why you might think that and.

These jobs are somewhat formal, is that you're the driver.

You're really a letter and a relatively long word that involves, you know, leveraging everybody's connection to the internet.

It's leveraging G.P.S. It's leveraging your credit cards.

It's leveraging a lot of structure. And you are signing a contract like you are a franchisee in some sense, of a big company.

You might say this should count as formal employment, but if you take a labor force definition, these guys typically don't get a wage.

So he may be count on his own employment.

Um, um, so so it's, uh, it's a good question.

Answer. Are digital nomads getting in?

You know, if they are employed by Amazon and if they get paid by Amazon, it would appear as formal.

If they're doing stuff online on websites, we might consider informal if they a business owner and so on and so on.

Okay. So. Um.

The literature on labor markets typically starts by assuming that labor markets are just regular markets,

and then they add a bunch of distortions to the market.

So if this is just a regular market, you know it has a supply curve.

It has a demand curve okay. These are they are supposed to cross.

And if they cross they're supposed to be, you know, an equilibrium with full employment at a certain wage.

So now let's complicate matters. And what are the things people put into a labor market that makes it the not as normal a market?

One is that, you know, in some sense it's a market for human effort.

And human effort is very hard to define.

So there are many market failures. One is that, um, it is not a homogeneous thing called human effort.

But your effort, my effort, somebody else's effort might be a very different thing and not easily observable.

So it doesn't have like, an auctioneer. I mean, the closest thing to an auctioneer is in the labor market.

One of these guys work for long and people working in ports.

I don't know if you saw this movie by Holland Brando On the Waterfront that called and every morning

it would come and there were a bunch of workers out there would say 20 workers and 20 workers,

and the rest were stand employees, whatever.

And you don't really care about the, uh, individuality of every worker because it's kind of like homogeneous, but in reality it's not like that.

Secondly, there's a lot of risks involved for workers.

You know, there's a risk if you're in the labor market to be unemployed.

You don't know how lousy and boring and stressful and whatever the job is going to be.

So you don't really know how big is that this utility work in this particular job.

If you have a noxious boss or etc., it's hard to predict.

You might get sick. And then what happens if you get sick?

You might have an accident, then you can't work. And what happens to you and you know, and you might get killed or you might get old.

It happens to some of us. And, um, then there might be market power on the side of employers, for example.

So the employer might have might be the only big employer in your town who has a lot of power in the labor market.

Or maybe, you know, unions have a lot of power. So.

Uh, in the labor market. Typically, you know, you hire labor, and then you have to bring those letters together to make a word.

And that implies coordinating across individuals. And it implies that somebody has to have the power to tell each one what to do.

So there's bound to happen. There are going to be power relations in, in, in in there in the process.

And there's going to be asymmetric information. Right.

Maybe during work the employer cannot see how much effort you're putting in.

You don't know if you're at your desk working or or searching the web.

Right. Before they hire you, they don't know exactly your skill level, your effort level, etc.

So if there's going to be asymmetric information so you don't have to spend money screaming who they're going to hire.

And, you know, uh, the groups that we have them go through, I don't know, three rounds of interviews and so on.

And we're not sure how how good our people are at screening for interviews.

And there's a moral hazard, right, that the a you would like a you would like to exert the minimum effort necessary.

So the employer is going to want to monitor you and spend resources making sure you put out the effort.

Um, you know, that may lead, as you know, from the efficiency wage literature that Stiglitz started.

Efficiency wages mean something to you. Can you raise your hand?

Well, I mean, the famous, famous Stiglitz model is that.

If you in the classical model. If, uh, if you don't put the effort that I contracted, I fire you.

But since in the classical model, there's full employment, the next day, you get a job with somebody else.

So firing you doesn't impose any cost on.

So the solution to that asymmetric information problem is that I'm going to pay you more than your opportunity cost.

So if I fire you, you'll feel some pain.

So I'm paying you so that you won't fire you.

But if everybody does that, then the equilibrium wage is going to be above the market clearing wage and there's going to be equilibrium unemployment.

And that equilibrium unemployment is the consequence of asymmetric information.

Have you seen that before? Now you have what name would you have given it to?

Did you see it at Harvard? I. Okay.

And then there's a public sector. In the public sector often, you know, it doesn't pay a market wage or face a contracted wage.

Sometimes that wage is very high. Sometimes it's low. Sometimes it's high at the bottom and low at the top.

So at the bottom of the skill distribution they overpay.

And at the top the underpaid. Typically you have a wage inequality in the public sector a smaller than wage inequality in the private sector.

Now if that's the case, then you might have some countries where people are unemployed waiting to get a public sector job,

because the premium of the public sector is large enough that it pays you to

wait to get a public sector job in the US to just become Harvard professors,

right? Yeah. Well, in the U.S., they say that and the government is where the Harvard graduates go to work for the graduates of Ohio State University.

So anyway. And then there's a bunch of rules that the governments impose.

There's regulations on child labor, on working conditions, extra hours working on Saturdays or Sundays.

There might be a safety regulations.

There might be severance payments. So you have to compensate you.

There might be minimum wages, etc. So there are all kinds of rules in this market.

And there's a whole literature on how to test for whether each one of these rules is binding or a major issue or not.

And can you imagine, for example, how would you test that the minimum wage is a problem?

You say? Okay. Some people say that the minimum wage in this country is causing unemployment.

How would you go about testing for it? One problem.

See if people are actually even paying for money.

You see people. So speak up. You're speaking to them.

Yeah, I guess I could taste it by seeing if people are even actually paying the minimum.

Beware the mark. How are you going to do that? Uh.

You might. I can give you a household survey, I guess.

So what would you look for? For average salary.

Average salary? That's one number. And, uh, and and so it's 32.

What do you want to compare that to? The minimum deliver to a minimum wage for the minimum wage.

Yeah, yeah. Okay, so you say you want to know if average wages are close to minimum wages or something.

If they are higher, if they younger. Okay.

What what else? Nothing else. Can't you look to the states that raise the, um,

minimum wage and see the effect on unemployment there compared to neighboring states where they don't?

I understand if you want to see the effect of raising the minimum wage on employment,

you study states where they raise it, and then you compare it to neighboring states where they don't.

Okay. So that's in order to test, but how would you. But before I do, I do that.

I just want to know. Is there a simple test of any chance that minimum wage is going?

Professor, you should see if this, um, uh, formal employment people,

large segments without circumventing the rule by hiding informal labor, hiding them from helping them.

Okay, so you would find a lot of employment below the minimum wage, typically in informal employment.

Okay, good. That's one. Even if I say no, if classified as formal, what you would expect to see in the wage distribution.

Right. High number of people employed in exactly in the minimum wage compared to a bit above it.

So you would expect bunching. You would expect bunching at the minimum wage.

Right. So you get maybe the people below the minimum wage are all self-employed or in the informal sector,

etc., and people, uh, there's a lot of people at the minimum wage.

Okay. Yes. Wouldn't there be bunching even if the minimum wage is not the problem because it's the minimum next floor anyways,

you know, I mean, there are some places, for example, the federal minimum wage.

$7.50 an hour, I think nobody pays out of Massachusetts.

Nobody. Right. But the, um, the Colombia has, um, minimum wage that is very high relative to the average wage, which was your preferred metric.

And there's a lot of bunching at the minimum wage. So, so countries are about to differ very much on this dimension.

And as my peers was saying, you might want to ask the question what happened when they move the minimum wage.

So for example, there is the argument that in Morocco, anybody doing Morocco.

Maybe I've seen before, I'll go there.

There's the argument that the minimum wage and and labor regulations might be quite restrictive.

And the there are periods in which it was raised.

So you can look at uh, uh, some things for example, there are losing a lot of employment in labor intensive exports,

and they're losing market share to labor intensive exports, in spite of the fact that we have high unemployment rates.

So we might say there's something weird here. Okay. And there is this idea that in because, you know, if you're a member of a family,

you go to work and they pay you more or less, but in the end, you share that income with your family.

So you're not really appropriating. You're you're seeing as far as you're concerned for the marginal income that you're

getting is not what you pay you because you're sharing it with somebody else.

So so I figure if you work more, you only get a fraction of what of your next transfer.

And that might stunt your willingness to work. So.

So the standard view as to, you know, what happens if you impose a minimum wage in a market that is kind of perfect?

Say this is the equilibrium wage. You put the minimum wage up here that's going to increase labor supply.

It's going to reduce labor demand. It's going to generate unemployment okay.

No. If in the market there is monopsony power.

You remember monopoly and monopsony.

Right. You did study that, right? The point about monopolies, right, is that the one over list internalizes the fact that.

As he lowers the window of prize. Arm in demand is going to go out,

but marginal revenue is going to go down more than you're internalizing the fact that you are lowering your price on everything else.

You're not taking prices as the one option is one option.

It's the other side of the coin.

This is a supply curve, but the one option is realizes that if he raises wages, he's going to have to pay everybody else before here.

More. So his marginal cost curve is above the supply curve.

And he will want to go to where the marginal cost curve crosses the demand curve,

but not pay this wage or pay this wage going to pay workers here and appropriate this difference.

That's what a monopsony would be. Okay. Who uses his market power to hire fewer workers and pay them less.

Okay. So if that's the situation and you're here and you now raise the minimum wage, you're going to force the company to go to the efficient.

So a minimum wage in a monopolistic market would actually get you to a better outcome than that without the minimum wage.

And that's sort of like the argument in favor of that.

And in that, yes, was mentioned in the study of looking at, you know,

what happens on the border of states where we raise the minimum wage and not the minimum wage.

And I think the famous story involves Connecticut and some other state.

And we found out that in new Jersey and Pennsylvania, new Jersey and Pennsylvania and Jersey and Pennsylvania, maybe.

Yeah, yeah. And they found out that they didn't it didn't hurt them.

Now, here is a famous Harris Todaro model.

It looks very much like, um, like, uh, Louis model.

This is agricultural demand measured from here.

This is same manufacturing demand measured from here. Now.

We're going to internalize the five that a something is going to keep a wages high in the manufacturing sector.

There's an institutionally set minimum wage in the manufacturing sector.

And so a worker that's in the agricultural sector is looking at the option of trying to get a job in the manufacturing sector.

He knows that the wage in the manufacturing sector is higher. But since there is unemployment.

The probability of getting that manufacturing job is less than one,

and the probability might be related to something related to say what chair or manufacturing talk to employment.

So, you know, his number is very high.

Then again, when you're sure to get a job in the manufacturing sector, if it's not very high, then you risk not getting the job.

And maybe this curve is this, uh, expected wage curve.

So, um, a you might get an equilibrium like here where in the cultural sector is going to pay this wage,

the manufacturing sector is going to pay this wage, and these people here are unemployed and waiting to see if they get, uh, formal sector job.

Okay. Okay, so.

Informality. Think of it. What we want to think of informality is, is simply one person by businesses or very small person like businesses.

Okay, but ehm, usually ehm, people use either very small firms.

Micro firms. Firms of five people or less.

Or some people like to use,

whether they pay taxes or don't pay taxes in the formal sector is very upset at the fact that they need to pay their VAT to value added tax,

and the informal sector supposedly doesn't pay the value added tax, and that goes in the literature as unfair competition.

So when you look at the enterprise survey of the world Bank and it says unfair competition, what they really mean is,

is that the informal sector is not paying the value out of tax, and they have to compete with that.

So now informal workers, we're going to define them as people who are kind of like outside the labor market.

And then there's some different types of unemployment. Unemployment is.

A frictional unemployment has to do with the fact that, you know, the labor market is like a set of musical chairs.

Right. So you have chairs and you have players and everybody's looking for a chair and so on.

At a certain point, they stop the music and you're supposed to sit.

And some people might be left without a chair because there are more people than chairs or more chairs and people.

Right. So there are some empty chairs. So the idea is that because this process takes it takes a real time and you're going to have some a pair.

In equilibrium. Some workers looking for empty chairs and some chairs looking for workers.

And there won't be some empty chairs, though at least some workers in the US being published.

Statistics on vacancy. In many countries they don't publish statistics on vacancies.

Vacancies. This is a hot topic because there's a company called Light Cast that puts together a massive amounts of data on job and job postings.

And there's booming literature using lighthouse data on job postings.

But in any case, in the US, for the last during the inflation period,

recent inflation period, there were like two vacancies per worker for unemployed workers.

And now that number is coming down and people are thinking, though this excess demand for labor is is moderating.

And that's why inflation is about to come down in most countries.

All right. I haven't had access to who am I?

They have a residence here. You have structural unemployment.

That's kind of like the full employment rate of unemployment.

There's something out there called the narrow. You know what the narrow is?

It's not a prime minister from India. Non-medical, celebrating completion rate of employment.

Yeah. It's the non accelerating. Non.

Accelerating. Inflation.

Rate. Of unemployment.

So one of the Spanish speakers among you. Let me explain that.

You know, the in English means they do things upside down.

You know, when you go to a restaurant, it says fine scented, roasted in garlic something.

Braised chicken. So you have to wait until the last word.

Okay. So the only rule.

Unaccented. Right. Not accelerating inflation rate of unemployment is not an inflation rate.

It's an unemployment rate. It's a rate of unemployment at which inflation does not accelerate.

It's the rate of unemployment at which inflation does not accept it.

That's how you would have said at a time. Okay.

So. So it's supposedly at that rate there's going to be more or less an equal number of people looking for jobs than jobs looking for people.

They just haven't found each other yet. And that might be, you know, 3.5% or 4% in the US.

Whatever that is, it might be 12% in Colombia.

Why? Maybe because the minimum wage is so high, maybe because of whatever.

Maybe because in a, you know, there's more spatial frictions that we're going to talk about that you know,

the jobs are somewhere and I'm here and I cannot connect to your job.

Exactly. We're going to talk about later in this lecture.

So it's important to know, you know what what is the rate of unemployment that you would observe in equilibrium where,

you know, if you try and you say expand labor demand, it would cause some rate inflation.

And then there's cyclical and employment, which has to do with these fluctuations of the rate of unemployment around that structural level.

And that's going to, you know, booms are going to see temporary rates of unemployment below the structural rate or the equilibrium rate.

And Boss are going to do the opposite. Okay. So. If reality.

Is, um, a pain in the neck.

In terms of how to interpret it. There's different theories out there.

One theory that I like to associate a lot with, Santiago Levy, who's, uh, a Mexican economist who,

uh, I recruited to substitute me at the Inter-American development Bank as chief economist.

He sees the informal sector as the consequence of policies that hurt formal firms and that encourage small firms.

And so in this informal sector, typically has lower rates of productivity.

He gets them to pay lower wages.

And the idea is that the informal sector exists because there are distortions in the formal sector that prevent them from being big.

Okay. So you would try to eliminate, for example, all these subsidies that are given to micro firms or better treatment that are given to micro firms.

They tend to make the informal sector bigger than they would otherwise be, trapping labor in unproductive activities.

They that should be hired by the firm. Okay.

A Amando de Soto cause, uh, the alternative is sort of like the romantic.

You would see the informal sector as a bunch of incredibly able entrepreneurs that are being restricted because of transaction costs,

lack of access to property rights, lack of access to capital and so on.

And that in. The problem is, how can we enhance them and the rights of the informal sector so that they can rise to their optimal equilibrium.

Okay. Then there is, um, the Slifer view.

And in the Slifer review, a formal and informal firms are radically different.

Formal firms have professional managers, um, that know how to kind of organize production in different ways.

They use different managerial techniques and so on.

A wider informal sector has much lower levels of education and skill in both managing the process,

and they really are unable to grow because they don't have the wherewithal to do it.

And so it's not that they will never they will never grow.

They don't have what it takes. There's kind of like a shortage in the supply of experienced managers.

But that's where the problem is. There's a nice paper that says experienced managers are more tradeable.

They can get jobs outside. So there's more of an equalization of wages globally.

So in poorer countries these managers are relatively very expensive.

And so there's just so many of them that can manage companies in the country.

And the rest have to be poorly managed in the informal sector because they're poorly managed to automate complex processes of production.

And that would be kind of like the Slifer view and then generates an example of this

in the two of you that says that maybe the informal firms have some capabilities,

but they are not good enough to break through to a to higher size,

because they might be constrained by the inability to produce at a certain quality level.

And so because they can't produce out of a certain quality level, we can't attract workers.

They can't attract contracts and they cannot grow. So. We're.

So in the labor market you're going to find problems of regulation,

problems of minimum wages, problems of severance payments, problems of indirect taxes.

There's going to be taxes on labor, you know, Social Security spending, passive tax on labor.

Unemployment insurance is pretty good. Tax on labor. There are taxes on labor to pay for training and so on so that the worker gets paid X,

but the firm pays a multiple of that 1.6 times the wage and so on.

There is unemployment insurance that people might like to make moral hazard because unions, collective contracts and so on.

And when we analyze South Africa, we have to look at, you know, what was how was there a union premium?

Was a union premium going up or down. Was that problem and and labor and labor demand.

This literature has not looked too much at spatially where the workers live, where are firms and how costly is it to go from A to B?

And since our projects in South Africa and in Wyoming now we think that this is a big thing.

And the and so we we are very hard on trying to understand how the labor market might be distorted by just the fact that it's hard to go from A to B.

So let me show you a little bit of labor market analysis.

So first one is. In South Africa.

South Africa has the highest measure of inequality in the world.

Because it's so unequal for its level of income. It has a lot of poverty, right?

So given its level of income, you would expect them.

Lower levels of poverty. But inequality is super high in South Africa.

For people in South Africa, where you see about a dollar a day or a few dollars,

and South Africa has the highest unemployment rate in the world, and, uh, it's in the 10th percentile of employment rates.

This is where you see that unemployment and employment are not.

So there's a lot of people in South Africa would declare to be unemployed.

But. Now when you look at wage employment, they're kind of like normal.

So for their level of income they have normal wage employment.

But hey, if you look, if you look at if you add the people who are in the informal sector or unemployed, you look at the unemployed.

These are those who didn't make it to the formal sector. So the informal sector plus the unemployed among that say excess labor.

They are the one that has the highest share of unemployment. So people choose unemployment and not informality in South Africa.

So the weirdness is you have a kind of like normal unemployment but super high unemployment.

These are the informal. That's something weird about South Africa.

And we would want to describe. Now.

The labor market in South Africa. Has an abundance of.

It. It's a very diverse country in terms of levels of development.

I have split it up into four groups. This is a traditional rural area, what they call in South Africa, the one two stands or the former home.

These are areas where during apartheid, they sent different tribes to different locations.

I'm going to show them in the map. Okay. That's the traditional rural areas.

This is for a formal rural area. This is a one in white South Africa.

And this is urban areas up to high school.

And this is urban areas with university degrees.

And what you might want to call modern employment public plus private.

See in the rural traditional it's really really small.

So the rest is informal unemployed, discouraged and inactive.

So almost nobody is working here. 20% of the people are working.

And. In the rural forum that is outside of former homelands.

They have incredibly high rates of, uh, formal employment.

Yes. Um, so employed, um, uh, that's the informal.

Yeah. Like the wide of the, the different spaces means, like, their share of the population.

Yes. So the total number of people is, uh, area of the of the, um.

Okay. So there's this this group of the red and the yellow that is formal, public and informal.

Private is a lot of the people with university degrees. It's much less of that in urban areas, but really ridiculously low in informal homes.

And this is a map of South Africa. And these blue lines is the former homelands.

And this is the rate of employment. You see that in the former homelands the rates of employment are incredibly low.

Okay. And we're going to analyze why the [INAUDIBLE] are these so low in in these areas.

Okay. 30 years after the end of apartheid. So we we had a, um, a panel survey, a panel data survey.

So, so we can track individuals over time.

And here you have the probability of finding a job if you started work in 2008.

This is the same people in 2008. The probability of you getting a job in a former homeland.

By 2008, now, two years later, the three years from the beginning, then four years on the beginning,

and you see that your probability of finding a job is really, really low when you start it.

And over time it grows, but very low compared to the probability of getting a job if you are outside for home.

Okay, so there are some weird people in former homelands can't get jobs.

But we ask ourselves the question, is it to help us or jump on some individual characteristic is some place characteristic?

So we asked ourselves a question what happened to people who started here in 2008 and then moved out?

In former homelands. Okay. Um. And this is the people inside who stay.

And these are the people who left and the people who left get more jobs than these guys.

So argument there's something about the place, not about the people.

When the people leave, they find jobs. Okay.

There's some self-selection, right?

There might be some self-selection to explain why this goes to almost point six, when this is probably point 35, right?

Actually, what we find is that life is cheaper in former homelands.

So we send just one member of the family outside and send remittances.

Okay. But there's some. For some reason you can't generate those jobs in former home.

So then we ask yourself why? And we found that the road network was much less dense in former homelands and so on.

So there's no property rights and former homelands in the same way.

So we came up with a bunch of stuff of how this all came.

We asked ourselves, why the [INAUDIBLE] does South Africa have sort of like normal formal employment,

but very, very low rates of informal people choose unemployment rather than informality.

So we said, okay, I know. Yeah. Um, and in a country like South Africa, where you do have high Social security,

is there also potential for high incentive to report unemployment and then also have informal employment

that doesn't show up in any statistics because people want to hide that they do have something called.

So the social old age pension and then they have another that is a non contributing pension for old people.

And then they have some nonconformity transfers to kids.

So if you are a foreign employee, if not, be not.

You are not getting money because you are unemployed, okay? But somebody is getting money because you're poor.

So so I said, it's always nice to think comparative.

So we have done work on Mexico. Mexico has low unemployment.

South Africa has higher unemployment. Let's compare Mexico to South Africa.

And ask ourselves, why is it that in Mexico employment rates are so much higher?

And this is the answer. Ay ay ay ay.

Informally employed is this blue line. This green line.

Okay. So they have very similar rates of formal employment.

But in Mexico there's much more informal employment. As a consequence.

Unemployment is very high in South Africa and unemployment is very low in Mexico.

So we ask ourselves the question, what are the things that our Mexicans are doing in the informal sector that they're not doing in the formal?

Let's let's compare formal and informal employment across all of these industries between Mexico and South Africa.

And we found that essentially what's missing in, uh, in South Africa, in South Africa is hospitality, retail,

transport, etc. there's a lot of missing informality in retail, transport, hospitality in factories and so on.

And why, you know, in some areas in South Africa has more and more employment that mix.

So here we we looked at transport costs, and I think I already spoke about transport costs in South Africa in the lecture on cities.

I don't recall. All right. These are the actual direct transport costs as a share of labor income.

And these are the total transport costs, including the opportunity costs measured as your hourly wage times the times it takes you to get to work.

And what you see is that these these rates are super high.

The first deciders would have to spend more than 35% of their expected income in direct transport costs.

And if you take the opportunity cost of the time, it's more than 80%.

So you would say, well, get into work if you are in the first class, I'll be so expensive that it doesn't pay to go to work.

Okay. And this is a very regressive problem because, you know, a car is a tradable gasoline is a tradable.

It has more or less the same price everywhere in the world. But wages are not tradable.

So wages can be very different from so typically in poor countries transportation tends to be relatively more expensive okay.

And these are transport costs by mode of transportation. So there's no.

So he's the best we could. But we have transport costs.

Average transport cost. Biden is about a B. And what we found is that, um.

There is a positive relationship between transport costs and how much it is the formal sector willing to pay more than the informal sector.

There's another variable called preservation wages, which is how much for how much you demand that a job pays you if you are going to accept that job.

It's in the household survey. That's one of the questions that we ask. And it's one way to get to reservation wages.

We find that there's a positive relationship with reservation wages.

Okay. So. So a if I face more transportation costs I expect to be paid more.

And so we find that municipalities that have higher transportation costs have lower wage employment,

more informality, much more unemployment and much more inactivity.

So all of that suggests that transportation costs has something important to do with the way the labor market is working in South Africa.

Transportation costs are huge, and they seem to matter for these outcomes.

So. A decent shot.

Whose, uh, empathy, I guess.

2021 Russell 2020. Maybe we worked out the, uh, the growth up with Federico Stuart since they came up with, uh, with, uh, Italy,

this kind of model where in eight people would have the option of searching for work and searching is costly,

or creating their own job in the informal sector, and that will have a certain productivity.

And firms can post a vacancy and then they search for workers.

And that's costly for them. And they have to pay the transport costs of the worker if they hire him or her.

Okay. And that model is going to have these, uh, equilibrium where a if if the informal sector is highly productive,

people choose informality like in Mexico because informality pays.

But if the productivity of the informal sector is low, people choose unemployment upwards.

So unemployment is high. So you have this kind of like wedge issue.

You're asking if I don't get out, if I'm not employed in the formal sector, what are my options?

Do I look for jobs? Do I look for informal, and do I create my own job in informality?

It depends on the transport costs and on the productivity of the informal sector.

Yes. Also, I would look at the social benefits, right?

Because in Mexico you don't work on interior. So like even if the problem is low for you cannot decide you.

Um, it's a big debate in South Africa.

If there is really moral hazard on the side of employees,

because the argument is that the kind of source of crime stories they have don't depend on your income, depended on more on your age.

So. So the argument we made is that in the, for example, this is the place in South Africa that has the lowest rates of employment.

Okay. And we went and visited. There is a picture we actually took.

But you see that homes are very far apart, one from the other.

Well here homes are one on top of the other.

So if you put a window in your home, there's a lot of foot traffic around your home that you can sell to.

If you put in, if you put a window here, there's no foot traffic.

So the productivity of your informal sector depends a little bit on the density of people around you.

Okay. And we are we are good. And we try to get data to show that in places that are densely populated within South Africa,

you see much more informality than in places that and in other places where informality is much lower.

Alvaro. Yeah, just wanted to show us how you measure, like informal productivity.

So just messages. Yeah, yeah.

So it was. Yeah. So, so anyway, so.

So the idea is that labor markets occur in space and, and that's going to, to impact the outcomes in South Africa because of apartheid.

They try to keep people apart. But after the end of apartheid the government kept on building social housing very far from where the formal jobs are.

So in South Africa, it's unusually long distances between where businesses are and here in Johannesburg and where they are building these,

uh, housing developments. And, and this is the typical housing development in South Africa.

They choose the government chooses a big house with a big plot of land.

And so you look at it and it says, this is great. Except that it's in the wrong place.

So people wish they had a smaller house in a better place.

And they actually show that they don't mind a smaller house,

because one of the things that is happening in these areas is something that they call backyard.

That people build a home in their backyard and rent it out.

That means that they prefer to get the money from the rent and to have the yard.

Okay. That tends to happen when the government decides on what to supply, maybe decide what to supply, where to supply.

They subsidize it. And so these are supply side subsidy.

As a consequence, what people can do is that they can invade illegal and eat illegally plots of land that are better located.

So what they call informal settlements are typically people invading property, setting their homes, their shittier homes.

