[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
You know. Um. What? Would I like to walk up in again if I could?

That would be frightening. So I can. Feel it.

Okay. Gotcha.

Can you hear me? Okay. Okay. Okay.

Um. You know where. I usually am.

Okay. Thank you. Uh. I am okay.

Okay. No. I don't I don't, you know, I do.

But I pretend to. Be beautiful, Claire, but I think.

Like you going. You do it. And if they were you.

You want. You want this one. You can do that.

Okay. Okay.

Allo allo allo allo. Writing honest in so housekeeping a I'm going to lecture tomorrow, and tomorrow we're going to start the macro sequence.

We're going to talk about national accounts, which and as you will see, it's the only part of economics that is truly.

Army. So thank you for submitting problems at three.

Problems at four is November 4th and covers finance, public goods,

labor markets and human capital and come to office hours uh, with John on Friday from 3 to 5 if you if you need help.

Okay. So let me let me wrap up, uh, the labor market lecture that we did last year, last Tuesday, a poor people have to consume less housing, right.

And, uh, but cheaper housing tends to be farther away.

And so they need to spend more in transportation as a share of their income,

both in terms of the direct cost of transportation and the opportunity cost of transportation.

And the thing is, you know, you've seen in the statistics that there's in most countries in in middle income countries and in low income countries,

there's a big adjustment factor, right.

Same typically middle income countries a dollar buys twice as much.

And in poor countries a dollar buys three times as much. Okay.

So that's the adjustment factor. But eh.

But the price of tradable tends to be the same everywhere in the world.

And trade deals are things like cars and gasoline.

So if you're in a middle income country, you know a car or gasoline looks like if it's worth twice as much.

And in a poor country it looks like if it's worth three times as much,

meaning that the relative price of transportation tends to be higher because it's more tradable, intensive, okay, because of the real exchange rate.

So transportation costs are relatively higher now.

Firms need to compensate their workers for their transportation costs, otherwise they don't show up.

Right. So this makes labor more expensive.

And so demand for labor declines and workers can maybe transform their homes into small businesses to save on transportation costs.

So you try to work from home and maybe sell to the foot traffic around their home or do something near their home.

And that way, this lower productivity activity, uh, it is lower productivity, but it doesn't involve paying this transport costs.

So it generates an equilibrium, a bigger call it informal sector, a bigger one person based economy.

Okay. So they opt out of the former labor market and become self-employed.

So informality, you can see it from this point of view.

This is one person by the economy as an option not to incur and commute costs, because commute costs are significant.

People know in the end to go to work is a pain, right?

And and even when we improve infrastructure, it can be a big pain.

Right. And you know, this is a I think this is what you mean city.

So it's obvious that there are big payoffs to mixing your letters with other letters.

But in a those costs are going to kick some people out of trying to do that.

They're going to try to find options to do that.

So that's that's our story.

So we even this comes from a village called Croston, which is ten kilometers from um San Cristobal de las Casas in Chiapas.

And if you want to go from Crookston to San Cristobal de la Casas, it's only ten kilometers.

There are no busses there, etc. You have to take a taxi, a shared taxi.

They charge by the person in the shared taxis and it costs $40.

So if you are a school director, you expect to earn $300 per day.

$40 is 13% of your salary.

But if you are down here, it's all of your salary. So that means you are ten kilometers away from or from a city.

But going to the city doesn't pay. It doesn't pay.

Okay, so you're kind of disconnected. Okay. You are excluded from the labor market.

So if going to work is costly, then you set up your shop at home.

And I took this picture actually in Valencia, Colombia. This was supposed to be, uh.

Um, public housing development.

What do they call it? Mega, uh, something that the foundation Santo Domingo built.

They call it mega something or mega something big, big urban.

However, no housing development. This actually is that was designed to be the kitchen.

And this was the dining room, living room. And they made it into a store.

So cities try to improve on this by improving, you know, by lowering transport costs.

Uh, the idea of the bus rapid transit, this is Bogota, and here we have the former mayor of Bogota.

And the idea is that, eh, you know, the, the space, the and the road space is a scarce resource.

And you can either assign it to people driving private cars or you can assign it to public transportation.

So the idea is this is a kind of a redistributive policy to say it is, not to say no.

If we are going to sign the space on the road to public transportation.

And so if you want to drive your own car, you will have to go here and face traffic.

If you want to go faster, take on the bus rapid transit.

Now this is a map of the city of Bogota.

And this is a colored by what they call in Colombia social strata.

The divide in the, uh, society into six strata.

One is the poorest, six is the richest. And this is where the rich live.

And this is where the poor live. And in grades, where it's not a residential area.

Um, and this is where the formal jobs are.

We took from the business registry. Uh, you know, the address of the business and, uh, uh, and the number of employees that they have.

And so this is where the formal jobs are. Okay.

But you see, this is where the rich people live. This is where the formal jobs are, and this is where the poor people live.

So you can ask yourself the question, how much does it cost to go from from here to there?

Right. And how much time does it take to go from here to there?

So we divided, um, we have data from Telefonica, and we have divided the city into 1000 towers,

cell phone towers, depending on, um, where you communicated at night and where you communicated during the day.

So we know where people have traveled from where to where. And the idea is we asked ourselves, how accessible are the formal jobs from where you live?

And we found that informality is negatively correlated a with accessibility to informal jobs.

Okay. A get it getting it through.

Uh, referee. It was so painful that we gave up a on on because everything is endogenous.

Obviously, if you're not going to get a formal job, you're not going to pay for a better location.

Um, and then you're going to have an informal income, which is probably going to be lower, but then you have to be farther away.

And but you don't pay transportation cost anyway, but you want to be close to foot traffic or whatever.

It was very interesting that the stores in this urban development tended to be on the corners,

because there's more traffic on a corner than on the side street anyway.

So. So there's. So this comes from a the book by Alberto.

This is when I say this, this is how much of the city is accessible with, uh, a car within an hour.

That is how, how many parts. Of the city can get to this point here within an hour with a car,

and this is how many points of the city can get to this point here within an hour using public transportation.

So you see, the now rich people probably can afford to have a car for people who need to have public transportation.

So for poor people, accessing the formal labor market is that much more complicated.

So for us, I mean, we stumbled into this because of South Africa.

And I showed you some stuff about South Africa in the previous lecture.

But now we think that where you put the homes, where you put the urban transport, how cost,

how accessible is the labor market is an important determinant of how well the labor market

works and how costly and how how unequal are the outcomes generated by the labor market?

Okay. So.

So one of them, I mean,

everybody that has worked on the informal economy or many people that have worked on the informal economy have emphasized, you know,

the role of regulation, the role of labor market regulations, the role of of minimum wages, the role of, you know, a bunch of stuff to do with labor.

There's very little attention to the stuff to do with housing, urban development, transport.

There's a witness the mushrooming of, uh, slums feature in all of this because, uh, we've seen, like, the major metropolises,

uh, the slums here, the manufacturing, uh, units of the industry of and people looking in the common sense.

What is it that they choose to live in the slums?

I mean, initially started as people in the informal sector, but then once they grow, then even people, people from cities to start looking.

So. So this is a you're completely right.

Let me give you three examples. In in South Africa you have slums.

They call them informal settlements. It's kind of like the politically correct way to say slum.

Uh, these informal settlements are have much worse housing on average.

Rental prices are pretty high, but they're much better located.

So it's obvious they are a way in which people express that they prefer location to housing quality or housing size,

that there's a trade off that many of the how social housing policies, c policies on social housing can be classified into two broad categories.

One is supply side subsidies and one is demand side subsidies and supply side subsidies.

The government says I want the home built under this specifications.

Typically, you know, they say we we want to be socially conscious.

So these are the minimum requirements of a home.

It has to have at least 40m². It has to have running water electricity.

It has to have a yard of at least this size, etc., etc.

So you put a set of technical specifications, and then you set a maximum price that you're willing to accept.

And then you go to a private sector and say and you tell them you build homes with this minimum specification and this maximum price.

So the way the private sector responds to that policy is that they buy the cheapest possible,

how cheapest possible land so that they can save on the land costs and abide by the government policy.

And since the government is paying anyway, what's the problem.

Right. And this tends to create homes that are ridiculously far away where the land is cheap because there's nothing there's no schools,

there's no medical facilities, there's no infrastructure, and there's the institution in Mexico.

It's called the infirmary. The infirmary is full of a of urban developments that are empty.

They built the stuff as specified as etc., and nobody wants to live there.

It's impossible to live there. Okay? There are no schools nearby.

There's no way to get in. There are no jobs nearby, no way to live there.

So that's supply side subsidies. On demand side subsidies.

You give the money to the beneficiary, and the beneficiary chooses what they want.

So the beneficiary is allowed to make the tradeoff between location and size and whatever.

Right. So when they did that reform in Colombia under the previous president, eh.

What ended up happening is that people chose much smaller apartments and much taller buildings with good amenities,

even swimming pools and a closer to this better location.

And so many of the urban housing policies in places tend to be supply side.

And as a consequence, the trade off between location and size and quality, etc. is made by planners.

It's not made by people and it may be a problem, it may be a problem that you want to have.

And so then there is a challenge in that sense, because the the root of the problem actually is not only planning urban planning rules,

but the fact that by definition, that urban market is a perfect market, you're not going to have more land.

Yeah. Is that is that a quantity that is restricted?

So subsidies to the demand allow express preference of location.

Much better. That subsidy is on the offer. That's true.

But at the same time it goes to the very well to sort of middle income people who can afford it and increases,

uh, the value of the create on average, and screwed more people to the peripheral areas.

So you don't solve, you know, solve the issue of low income people being located in the more particular areas.

Quite the opposite. You still, uh, increase that challenge.

So I would say that you have to do land use plan.

You have to capture the value of added land by the aggregation of living in that place.

And also about this lack of urban amenities of transportation,

you have to recapture that instead of but allowing to the private sector to monetize entirely the public investment they money by taxes,

uh, capture that to regulate the land value throughout the city and to provide transportation or public services and jobs.

I would say that that's the most missing link in urban planners.

They train to provide amenities.

They're trained to provide housing, but they forget also always about jobs.

Uh, that's the most important thing people are looking for in in aggregate.

So I think we need to combine intervention in the land use planning to control the land value, to capture day out of the value of that,

by the fact that we want to live together, uh, retailers and have opportunities to provide transportation, jobs and amenities location.

That's what you need to combine housing. So it's it's interesting because there are several issues that are often confused.

For example, one issue that is often confused is part of a political coalition in favor of public housing is the construction sector.

Now the construction sector by definition builds new homes.

Right. And so you want to say, okay, this is going there's going to be subsidies involved, social housing, etc., new homes.

But you know, in the car market, um, you know, the poor buy used cars.

So what's wrong with buying used homes, right?

Um, so is the problem the fact that you want the family to have a home?

Or do you want the family to have a new home? Right.

So you can imagine that you give that subsidy to two people to choose whatever an old or a new home.

Typically, all of these things are targeted to new homes because part of the coalition is the construction industry.

But then you want to target the subsidy. So you want to say you are in Columbia, reclassify them into one of six things.

And and they only have big subsidies for strata one and two.

Okay. But then you decide that okay, I'm going to make a development for strata one or strata two, okay.

Which means that you are socially segregating people in space.

You are saying here only poor people are going to live. So the kids that live there don't have a friend who's the son of a dentist.

Because that's the way the policy works, as opposed to having sort of like more mixed use developments where you say, you know,

you make your money out of selling to rich people, but you have to sell us a certain number for structure one and two within your development.

In that case, you are kind of like mandating social mixing.

Okay. So there are a lot of design possibilities in this space.

Okay. Yes. Um, I think that I mean, it depends on, um, cultural aspect and countries, but, uh, like the problem tends to be much more complicated,

I think, like, for example, probably Colombia is similar, but in Chile, um, housing the people that live in the slums call it contaminated.

I like, I don't know, like these communities.

Um, it's not that you can give them, like, a voucher and they can choose because they want to move as a community to like someplace.

So like you have also the community component.

And they want like, uh, development for all of them because like they have like, uh, between them, for example,

that uh, like mini markets, they have like people that like, take care of their neighbors when they work.

They, uh, provide they have like a secure network between them.

So it's not that you can, like, relocated a single families.

That's easy to coordinate, like a supply for, like, all the government.

Well, I mean, that's one of the reasons why you prefer to upgrade than to move.

Right? And so there's a lot of policies towards the settlements that these informal settlements end up being upgraded rather than moved.

But you touch an important point. I wrote one so OP and I, we should distribute.

I don't know if it wasn't the reading called uh uh, habitat, not housing.

But what people want is not a house. They want a house in a social network.

Right? They want their habitat. And this reminded me another policy that I learned about in Colombia,

which is that there was, uh, some floods and many people displaced by the floods.

So the government decided to build some homes for the people displaced by, by the floods.

But they put the homes right in a new that's a new in a new place.

And the only thing in common of the people in that place was that they had all been displaced by a flood,

but there was no social connection between them.

In that case, have you given them how did you build the same homes but allocated to whoever wants to go there?

These people would have freed their homes. And maybe you were sending those homes to to the people that were displaced by flood.

So you you don't ask them to create a new social network.

You incorporate them into an existing social network.

So anyway, so this is there's a huge space of policy to think about in this area.

I think it's uh, it's going to be uh, it's an important policy.

And the determinants of what is our next topic, which is inequality.

So let me and move on and, and say that, um, the first this next slide is, is uh.

Is, uh, an apology, kind of, uh, because we all have a certain idea of what inequality is.

Uh, but it's not necessarily what we tend to measure.

Okay. So if you wanted to ask yourself what inequality is, you would first ask the question.

Inequality of what? What the [INAUDIBLE] are we talking about?

Right. So is it inequality of income, inequality of outcomes.

Inequality of opportunities? No. Inequality of treatment?

No. There are many, many ways in which you can think about inequalities in which inequalities matters to you.

So a one philosophical current so-called consequentialism, of which the utilitarian philosophers are probably the biggest camp in that field.

It's about you want policies that lead to the greatest happiness for the greatest number, right and aim.

Or you might have a kind of like a bias weights in your utility function or social utility function.

No, John Rawls wanted a the greatest happiness for the worse off.

Right. So so it's yes, it's the greatest happiness. But you care about the bottom of that distribution.

Okay. So anyway, but those are a about consequences.

A, uh, an alternative one is a, you know, inequality of capabilities and capabilities.

Amartya Sen uses it in a slightly different way from the way I would use it.

Okay. Well, we we've been using it in this course. Um, capabilities are sort of think of them as possibilities and opportunities.

So it's, um, you know, you have twin brothers.

They were raised, they have the same genetic code, so there's no genetic differences.

They were raised by the same parents, etc. And one of them decides to go and work in Wall Street.

The other one decides to spend his day surfing in California.

A one is richer than the other. You would say that's a choice.

Oh, and they've optimized. Leads to very different levels of income.

But you know you don't. You don't feel part of that, that you care that much about that inequality.

Right. So outcomes might not might not be.

Hey, by the way, this is a typo. This should say Nozick talking about game.

That's correct. And again. So the idea here is.

What really matters is not the outcome, but the process that leads to the outcome.

And if the process is fair and you find it fair, the outcome doesn't matter.

So. Who's the current most famous basketball player LeBron James LeBron James.

So if he he he talked about and Nozick talked about Wilt Chamberlain.

But if I said Wilt Chamberlain many people would not have known.

It sounds like a British prime minister. So LeBron James.

So a if if everybody loves to watch LeBron James play.

And as a consequence, LeBron James is paid a lot of money.

Well he is very rich because many people want to see him play.

So if everybody went happily to see him play.

And so the process might lead to unequal outcomes.

But nobody has been hurt by the process. Right.

So. But for the most part, we're going to measure it.

Or the literature has mostly measured inequality of outcomes, inequality of income.

Okay. Um. And there are, ehm, different ways of measuring inequality of income.

Two popular ways is the Gini coefficient and the title index.

The Gini coefficient, you know, is this is the um, here you put in the population,

you order it by income, you put the poorest here and the richest here.

If you have an Excel sheet and you have a household survey, you put the poorest household to the richest household, okay.

And you're going to make two called two columns in your Excel sheet.

One column is what percentage of population you have and the other column is what percentage of the total income you have okay.

So you rank them by income. And you have, you know, how many people in that household or you know how many people there by income.

And you count what proportion of the population you have and what proportion of the income you have.

Perfect equality would mean that everybody has the same income. You're on the 45 degree line.

A how much of the cumulative income you have is what they call the Lorenz curve.

Okay. And essentially the Gini coefficient is this area.

Okay. So a Gini coefficient of one is perfect inequality.

Only one person has everything. And a Gini coefficient of zero means perfect equality okay.

Um, the, um, the tile index is based on a super simple trick.

It's a really cool trick. Okay. It's the difference between the geometric mean and the arithmetic mean.

Okay. You know what the arithmetic mean is? A.

You sum. The A's.

From I equals one to n, right.

And you divide by n right. Suppose you have two numbers one and nine.

You add one and nine. That gives you ten.

You divide by n which is two.

You get five right. No.

So average income is five. What? What is your geometric mean?

The geometric mean. Is you take the product of the I's from I equals one to n, you multiply them, and then you elevate it to the one over n.

Okay. That's the geometric mean. If you take logs of the geometric mean, it will give you one over n times the sum of log of I.

Okay. Okay, but let's take the geometric mean of this nine times one.

Anybody care to? Nine times one is nine, right?

Square root of nine is three. Okay.

So the relationship of three relative to five.

The more unequal the lower will be the geometric mean relative to the arithmetic mean okay.

That's the intuition behind the time. But one beautiful thing about the style is that it is decomposable okay.

It is decomposable. So if you want to say I want to know how much of the inequality is between men and women,

then you are the men on one side, you have the women on the side, and then you have the two.

If you are not between urban and rural, between, etc., so you can decompose, how much of the inequality comes from each group?

Okay. I want to say.

You okay? Are you gonna do the same with the dinner?

No. The genie is not decomposable, unfortunately. Okay.

So. So now we're going to play around with your brains.

Aim. Have you all got it?

Okay, so what's the first question? But you have.

But where is it? In the service.

I think they have it. So you tell me when I'm supposed to.

18 surveys. 20 surveys. I mean four.

Okay. Okay. Good.

Okay, let me see. So what happened to global inequality since the 1990s?

60% agree that it increased okay.

So global inequality increased.

That's the popular opinion. A third say is that a decrease.

Some people say no substantial change okay.

Then the next one are we voting for the next one.

Yeah yeah they have the three at the time. So uh, three at the same time.

Okay. What has happened to income inequality in most countries? An increase 71% say yes, a decrease 24% say no.

Okay. And I have a third question, but and what has happened to poverty in most countries in the same period in 19% say it decreased.

Okay. Good, good. So now that we know the A the true facts, now let's look at invent the data.

So this is what has happened to global inequality.

Global inequality started here and it moved to the right.

The whole distribution moved to the right means that there was growth. Growth means that, you know the distribution moves to the right.

But this peak C went down, C went down.

So there's more people shrunk towards the middle. And this went in to the left.

To the right. This this thing became less pronounced or less bimodal.

No. So when you calculate the Gini on this.

The genie went down. So global inequality has been falling and global inequality has been falling, essentially because in this period,

China and India started below the world average and grew faster than the world average.

So. So this is the level of income.

This is income growth between 1988 and 2008, according to Branko Milanovic.

This is how much each, each quintile each went tile how much each went tile of income increased its income.

And you see that in these when times of income increased their income a lot,

these rentals of income in the world increased their income very little or not at all.

This happens to be sort of like the middle class in middle income countries or the rich in middle income countries.

These are the poor and rich countries. So the poor and rich countries didn't see much growth.

The rich in rich countries did see a lot of growth, but a lot of middle income people in middle income countries saw a lot of growth.

Okay. So that's what's captured by the Gini going down.

But you know, a deeper description. Let's say all of these things are happening okay.

So so the correct answer to the first question is that global inequality has declined.

And so only a third of you got it right. The next question is what has happened to a global inequality.

Uh, the two inequality at the country level. And I don't know, how do you want to characterize this?

I don't know how you want to characterize this, but I would characterize it as it being all over the place.

Okay. In the rich countries, it seems to be going up.

But in many poor countries or middle income countries, it was going down.

So I think the correct answer to that was all over the place.

Okay, but what if you wait the countries by population a a I would still think it's all over the place.

Um, I mean, there's no clear pattern, right?

There's no clear pattern here. So and that's important to know that, you know, um, it's not a universal that inequality always goes up.

Sometimes it goes up, sometimes it goes down. In Chile, Mexico.

Argentina. Venezuela. Uh. In Belarus and in the, uh, you know, whatever.

So. But you were right. In 90% of you were right in that poverty everywhere it goes down.

Now, why the [INAUDIBLE] does poverty go down everywhere when inequality is growing all over the place, right?

Because there's a very important mathematical distinction between poverty and inequality.

Right. And this is say this is the income distribution.

Poverty just looks at the area to the left of the poverty line.

Okay. So if there is growth.

Then this thing moves to the right. Even if it gets a little bit faster, fatter.

Which would be inequality inequalities. How fat is this distribution?

Even if it gets a little bit fatter, the area to the left of that fixed line goes down right.

So growth reduces poverty.

Mechanically you would need to have very,

very rapid increases in inequality to compensate for the fact that the whole distribution is moving to the right.

Okay. Okay.

Good. Yes. Right. Are you measuring absolute poverty or, um.

No. Obviously this is absolute. Yeah. There's a fixed poverty line.

It needs to move, right? Well, I mean, it depends on what you want to say.

If you want to say that poverty is the 30% poor part of society, then poverty will be 30%, right, because you're are relative.

And so that's why, by the way, there's a very interesting measures of poverty.

There's a sequence of measures of poverty. Um, which would be you count.

So you have a poverty line and absolute poverty line. Okay.

So you you counter, you count y minus y poverty line.

Okay. Uh, and you sum this for I equals, uh, one, two I less than y bar.

So you only count the people who are below the poverty line.

Okay. And you're going to elevate this to the J.

Okay. Now, what happens to a number when you elevate it to the power?

Zero minus one one.

Right. So if I, if I make j equals zero, say let's call that P0.

Okay. What is this going to do. It's going to count everybody who's below the poverty line.

Right. What happens if I make J equals one.

And. And let's make it better. Like this white bar minus one.

Okay, so these are positive numbers because they're all below white. Okay.

What happens if J equals one. What does it give you.

This. Um. Um. Huh? This whole thing come together.

They call that the poverty gap. It's. How much income would you have to give every poor person so that you would just eliminate all poverty?

So it's the poverty gap. It's. It's a fraction if you want, of national income, that would have to be given to the poor for the poor to be not poor.

I think it's an interesting characteristic.

So if you are very far from the poverty line, if you're $10 out of out of the poverty line, you count for ten.

If you're $1 down from the poverty line, you count as one. And then you can imagine that instead of putting one, you could put two.

What is that going to do? Right.

Hi. Away from people who are far from home. It will.

It will weigh people farther from the mean more than proportionally.

Right. So that's a set of poverty measures that you can take, right.

So that's just metrics. Okay. Interesting.

Okay. So let's go to inequality and complexity.

So I've already shown you this graph. You remember this is the fraction of the alphabet you have.

And this is the fraction of the dictionary you can write. Right.

And and you said okay it depends on the grammar.

If all that if all words are one letter long then it's very linear.

But if if the world is made out of complex letters, then if you have five letters and every word is ten letters long,

you make zero until you have enough, and then it goes up a lot.

Okay. And when we estimated using real world data, we tend to get these very complex relationships.

Okay. This is going to mean that places that are how few letters are going to be able to make very little.

Not only that A they will get a very small payoff from any extra letter.

And places that have a lot of letters are going to be able to make a lot, and they're going to get big effects of getting more letters.

So this is going to be a machine that generates inequality.

So complexity generates inequality. Okay.

If you have any distribution of, of, uh, of stuff.

So you have to ask yourself the question, should you put some letters everywhere or put all letters somewhere.

Right. And this is, uh, a really horrible trade off.

Right? Um, and can you explain again the channel to which, uh, complexity generates inequality?

Uh, that is. This mechanism.

Suppose that these are regions of a country, and some regions have five letters.

Some regions have 15 letters. Okay.

The 15 letters are going to be able to do much more than three times the five letters, right?

Because this relationship is very complex. Okay.

So and by the way, the five letters want to leave to go to where the 15 letters are.

So this is going to generate an incentive for agglomerations.

It might be one of the reasons why Santiago has 40% of the population of Chile.

Um or Peru has 40% of Lima has 40% of the population of Peru, and so on.

And so. So you see, the trade off is a [INAUDIBLE] because a your heart wants to put some letters everywhere.

But if you put some letters everywhere, you get zero everywhere.

If you put all letters somewhere then somewhere you're going to get something.

But then everywhere else you're going to get very little. Okay.

So that's another sense in which, you know, a, you know, you're you're facing really bad trade offs.

Okay. So so I'm going to illustrate this with the case of Japan's okay.

And we've already talked about Japan's in the past. But I'm going to show you another trick to decompose.

Kind of like sources of inequality or, you know, answer your question.

Waste your passport. We know that Japan is the poorest state in in Mexico.

But if I look within Japan's. Different municipalities of Japan's.

You get a factor of eight. Difference between rich and poor municipalities, even within Japan's.

You say, why the [INAUDIBLE] would there be? You say why?

You told me that your place is poor. But no.

It just so happens that the Duke's address and Compton Domingues are significantly above the Mexican average.

Go figure. I don't know. Uh, and, uh uh, and anyway, in Tapachula.

And anyway, so we were able to calculate, um, economic complexity index at the level of municipality for Mexico.

And, you know, the average municipality of Mexico, the average complexity of Mexico means that Mexico knows how to make many things right.

And that's where Mexico is in the product space. This is the export basket of Chiapas.

And this is where Chapa is in the product space. So you say well, Japan's on average as much less fewer letters than Mexico on average.

Right. So we ran um mincer regression.

Trying to explain what explains the differences in income.

Of different people in Mexico. And you estimate that for the US average and for the Mexican average to use that equation.

Equation to decompose. This is called Oaxaca blinder decomposition.

It's an interesting coincidence that.

That is the name of an economist. It's also the name of a poor Mexican state program.

And what this says when you decompose is that, yes, Chiapas is poor because it has less education.

It has lower quality education of Spanish.

It has lower quality of education of math. It has younger people.

So they have less experience. You would expect them to earn less.

There's fewer women in the labor force than the Mexican average.

And since women earn less, that subtracts from why they are poor.

Okay, they are more indigenous. So they're more rural.

And that explains in part why Japan is poor.

But once you put the economic complexity index of the municipality, the economic complexity index absorbs most of the variation.

So Chiapas is poor because it has few letters.

Okay. So one of the reasons why why you have inequality in Mexico is because of a poor distribution of letters.

So you might think that inequality is about how are we sharing a pie?

National pie. But there is.

There is a fiction that there is such a thing as a national pie. Everybody is baking pies.

But the problem is that the baked pies are very different sizes. Okay, so there is a lot of inequality in productivity.

You might be thinking, oh, there's inequality. I want to encourage you to think about inequalities in productivity.

Okay. As a source of of our headache there's a lot of inequality in productivity.

Okay. Okay. So these are some dimensions of inequality you might want to explore.

Okay. And what are the possible areas in which you think that in the country you're working on inequality shows up.

Here I'm highlighting that there was a lot of regional inequality in Mexico.

I hope one of you asked me the question, but didn't you tell me in a previous lecture that there's spatial equilibrium?

And that consequently there's some equalization of outcomes between a country because people are free to move?

So you might ask yourself the question, why don't people move? And the answer might be, well, they actually do move.

So you might want to use your household survey to ask who's moving from where to where.

And that might be an indication of, you know, which regions are, you know, have are offering lower than, than average in which regions are attracting.

So what is the process trying to accomplish? Okay, in terms of moving in other ways?

Remember, if I have two cities, if I have two cities.

Let me go there. If I have two cities, say.

This is the marginal product of demand for labor.

And once it uses demand for labor in the other city, uh, then the two cities will have these relative sizes.

Okay. Suppose that there is a positive productivity shock in one city.

What's going to happen. Well, say this productivity goes up. So.

Demand for labor in the city goes up. The outcome is that wages in both cities go up.

But the city that got the productivity shock became bigger.

And the one that didn't get the productivity shock became smaller.

That's when there are no frictions. But suppose now there's infinite friction.

And the friction comes from the fact that we have a completely inelastic supply of housing.

Okay. You have a perfectly inelastic supply of housing.

So people cannot move or they can move, but they have to kick other people out, right.

So the number of people living in each place doesn't change.

And that the absolute number of people, the actual individuals might change,

like the ones that are going to this hyper activity industry might want to move to a city.

But since the total number of people cannot change,

what's going to happen is that the equilibrium is going to be this city pays this wage, this city pays this other wage.

But this difference becomes increase in real estate prices because people want to live in this city, but there is no way to get into a city.

You can only gentrified kick out some of the people who are already there.

Okay, so in net terms, gains in productivity are not appropriated broadly by workers if you under appropriated by real estate owners.

And it's a highly inefficient outcome because you don't get the gains of having these people earn more because because now there are fewer of them.

And, and equilibrium wages go up everywhere. Okay.

So so in elasticities in the process of equalizing these things are going to generate inefficient outcomes that are unequal.

Okay. Or unequal housing. Okay.

So let me show you some A I'm you're benefiting from the fact you're benefiting from the fact that I'm,

I'm going to teach a course on US cities in January.

So we've been preparing for to teach about U.S. cities.

And you cannot talk about U.S. cities without talking about racial inequality and the sort of, like, top of mind issue racial inequality.

So I'm going to show you data on racial inequality, okay.

Yeah. The lightning strike something. I won't show you that I've got this is I'm showing it to you because this is a

different way of cutting your household surveys if you have ways of doing it.

Okay. So in. Um.

So the idea is that all cities are equal, but some may be more unequal than others.

And there there might be gaps in education that explains part of the income gaps, but often that's less than half of the gap.

Controlling for occupations reduces the gap even further.

So what I have here is what share of the population is black, and what share of the income goes to black families?

Okay, so a perfect equality would means if 20% of a population is black, 20% of the income goes to black families.

Okay. So here you have in all the cities seem to sort of line up into a to align.

So more or less everywhere, you might say that African Americans earn less than, uh, than the rest of the population or the average of the population.

But in these, these cities, some of them are above the line, which is like Dallas is kind of like more than expected in Houston.

African Americans do relatively better than they would have done in other places, and others are below the line.

So it would be useful to to see them relative to the line.

And that's what we do here. Okay.

So um, that's the difference in the share of wages going to African Americans relative to the share of wages going to the population.

And then there you can say, okay, uh, these, these places are, are doing well, relatively well, and these places are doing particularly poorly.

Okay. So if you are the mayor of a city, you want to say, am I relatively well or doing relatively well, but then that controls for nothing.

Doesn't control for, for example, schooling.

So this is the percentage of the income gap that is explained by differences in average levels of schooling.

Okay? Yes. How do you, um, get to this?

Is it through a mental regression? Sorry. How do you get to this?

Um. Disaggregation is at the moment a regression. Yeah.

I mean, so regression. So, um, you take them into regression,

and then you use the coefficients of the regression to calculate what is the

expected difference in income if you eliminate differences in the in education.

So what would have been the difference in income if you had eliminate the differences in population.

Notice that there's this interesting place Riverside where African-Americans do better than expected.

Um, in that place education explains very little.

So you have it's a place that has very educated African-Americans.

Yes. Can you go back to that? That's good. Okay.

Have you done that like coloring? Which kids are Democrats or like.

So. Okay. I like that, I like that.

So once you start playing with the data and you put it in a framework which kind of answers a question, it begs to explore the next question, right.

Take a look back with you.

Well, this is Republican versus Democratic, even though probably San Antonio as a town is probably Democratic, but the state is Republican.

This is in California. These are Democratic.

Well, this is Minneapolis, in this battleground states.

Cleveland. But typically the north of Ohio is Democratic.

So Boston is doing poorly. Okay.

But here we had not the where's Boston here. So a lot of the gap in Boston is explained by differences in education.

Okay. So this is.

The coefficient of being black. Controlling for age, gender and college degree.

Okay so here it says Austin is doing poorly.

Where's Boston here. Boston is doing okay. Relativity's right.

So apparently controlling for education makes a big difference in Boston.

Okay. Now, it just so happens that a lot of the extra income gap is explained by occupations.

This year. You're saying, well, do you have a high school degree or not?

Or you have a college degree or not? But it doesn't say which college degree or what are you, a nurse assistant or you are,

uh, you know, electrician or you what are you so controlling for, for occupation?

The income gaps are much smaller.

So it means that part of the process, whatever it is, it's going through how people integrate to the labor market, what kind of jobs they have.

And so here we did this I think for, for in Baltimore, you're looking at the city of Baltimore.

So in which industries are Latinos over underrepresented and which industries are Latinos?

Are Africans underrepresented and overrepresented?

So in Boss in Baltimore, nurse assistants, personal care aides, licensed practice practical and licensed I don't know what.

So so this is all health care and and and so African Americans are overrepresented in these um,

and these areas and they're underrepresented as software engineers, uh, sales representatives, as chief executives, etc.

Okay. So. We looked into, into, you know,

comparing how do African-Americans get selected in the labor market relative to Latinos and Latinos are agricultural workers, painters,

construction laborers, landscapers, and and African Americans are nursing assistants,

security guards, vocational nurses, home health aides, social workers, etc.

Okay. So anyway, so it gets you to understand how are people being integrated into the labor market?

What are the differences in the way people are integrated into the labor market and even after controlling for years of schooling.

So it's something about which letter you have and what words do you go into?

Okay. Okay. So um, so I'm going to go now through a certain theory of what's the problem with inclusion of the problem with inclusion.

So this is one way to transport water.

Right. And this is another way to transport water. Okay.

This is one way to transport energy and this is another way to transport energy.

This is one way to go to work and this is another way to go to work.

Now what is different? For example, if I asked oops, if I asked you which is cheaper this way to transport energy or this way to transport energy?

First. Hmm. Second, this is cheaper.

So why would I want this person? A condition of having the infrastructure conditional on having the infrastructure.

And how should I think of infrastructure? Infrastructure is what kind of object?

It's a fixed investment. Fixed cost? It's a fixed cost.

So conditional on paying a fixed cost, variable costs go way down right.

So fixed costs are involved here.

They are involved here right. They are involved here.

Right. So what's general about these things is that there are some fixed costs that you need to pay.

But once you pay that fixed costs, the variable costs go way down. Right.

So we're going to think that this is at the core of the story okay.

So modern production requires, you know, many letters and putting together letters okay.

You're required to bring people together with different expertise.

Right. You need to be connected to the electricity grid, to the water grid, to the banking grid, etc.

So you want to agglomerate these things okay. So we're going to targeted places, make people more or less productive places,

involve differential access to many things that are need for production.

Formal production requires many of them. Complex production requires access to many of these letters.

But accessing these things involves paying some fixed cost.

Okay. So for example, if you're a bank, the fixed cost of opening an account for a person with $1 million and for a person of $10.

The fixed cost of opening the account is going to be very similar.

But the benefit to the bank of incurring that fixed costs is going to be very different.

So banks are not going to be in the business of attracting small clients because they cannot recoup the fixed costs.

And if you are going to be poor, I don't want to connect your house to the grid because since you're poor,

you're not going to be buying too much electricity. And if you're not going to buy too much electricity, I won't be able to pay for the fixed cost.

Okay. So so these are some of the networks that you would want to combine to connect to.

So the idea is that connecting to these networks requires a fixed cost.

If your income is low it does not pay to connect you to the network.

But if I don't connect you. Then you are disconnected.

You don't have access. You're poor.

So you get into this bad equilibrium that I don't connect you because you're poor and because you're not connected,

you're unproductive and hence poor. Okay, so fixed cost can generate a bad equilibrium.

That bad equilibrium is what we want to call exclusion. You're being excluded.

You're poor because you are unproductive, and you are unproductive because you're excluded.

So if you are able to include you. Your productivity will go up.

But since you started the game being poor and all your productivity has gone up.

Okay, inequality goes down, but GDP goes up.

This is something we call growth through inclusion. They grow through inclusion.

So instead of thinking about the trade off between growth and inequality or something, no, this is no.

I'm going to try to increase average productivity by expanding the access of people to the elements that make them more productive.

But since I'm expanding it towards the ones that started the game,

unproductive in the process of expanding that, their inequality goes down, but GDP goes up.

Okay, so that's what we call growth through inclusion.

Yes. Is this a trade off or in this like for example we have two cities.

One is quite regional. And here we have another large city.

Does it still make more sense from the network complexity theory to take that same spend and

print the large city and extend that one additional letter has a larger marginal benefit?

Well, if you say you are the letter L.

You're disconnected. You can't make anything with a letter L if we pay the fixed cost of connecting you now, you can participate.

So now you can mix your letter with all the other letters. So your productivity goes up, our productivity goes up.

We're all better off. So it may pay us to connect you.

So that's where we're going. But let me give you an example of of these things.

A in Burkina Faso. 100.

And there's 112 cell phones for every 100 people.

Everybody has a cell phone, but only 19 people have access to electricity now.

Is that because electricity is a new technology that hasn't had the time to diffuse, while cell phones are an older technology?

So what's the difference? Yes.

I don't know if this is the answer you are looking for, but one is like private investing, like people are going through.

So. So for and the other is public investment. That's probably their government is for.

So you would say if we privatized it they would connect. No I'm saying that their government is not providing them like electricity and water.

I would argue that the infrastructure needed for both services are different.

For electricity, you need a more like fixed investment, either from public or private investors.

Um, for, for like functionally a different, maybe cheaper infrastructure to make it work.

So you're saying, look, the fixed cost is lower because you don't have the last mile problem of,

you know, connecting the grid to the last mile to the house, etc.

So fixed costs are lower when the fixed costs are lower, technologies diffuse faster when the fixed costs are higher.

They don't diffuse, right? Electricity is much, much older than cell phones, but the fixed cost is higher so they don't diffuse.

So the trap you're talking about is that if you're poor, it's not profitable to connect you.

But if you're not connected, you are unproductive and hence poor. So the inclusion tradeoff is it is involves how to pay for the fixed cost.

And there are two ways of doing it. You can either share the fixed costs, reduce the fixed cost, or share the fixed cost.

Let me know. Yeah.

Yeah. So one way of lowering fixed costs is, you know, cell phones, vis-a-vis landlines.

For example, in India, I think that their peak landlines reached 6% of the population.

They never diffused about cell phones because you lower the fixed cost.

And you can say that microlending is an attempt to do the same thing.

You say the fixed costs are too high a tool for the credit market to to cover them.

So you invent a group lending and etc. etc. you try to find a technology that where the fixed cost of lending goes down.

Solar based, you know, disconnected electricity.

You might not need to connect that village to the grid.

You can have just the local stuff. So it might lower the fixed cost of accessing electricity.

And the same thing with transportation systems. You know, a metro system involves a huge fixed cost, but once you have it, you know, so.

So one thing is imagining lowering the fixed cost. Another way is to share the fixed cost.

And I hear I give the example of a U.S. Postal Service because everybody knows what happened in 1776.

In the U.S., they know, right. But few people know what happened in 1775.

And in 1775, the Continental Congress decided to create the postal service.

And the postal service. You can think of it as the internet of the times.

And they decided that every incorporated city, actually, that was almost the definition of what an incorporated city was.

The definition of unincorporated city is a city that would have a post office, and every incorporated city got a post office.

And they also accepted the idea of flat rates. If the market had developed the postal service,

the market would have connected Boston to New York and to Philadelphia, but not Boston, to Springfield and so on.

So they decided that they wanted this to be accessed by anybody in the system.

That was a public policy choice. Okay. So I want you to think about instances in which a the adoption of a technology,

the spread of a technology involves some decision about ARM sharing the fixed cost.

And how do you allocate the sharing of a fixed cost? Okay.

Okay. So, um, I wanted to I had here two more topics I wanted to show you very quickly.

One is we we worked on Namibia. And everybody in Namibia was, you know, a German colony, then became, uh, South African possession.

Then they fought a war of independence and they became independent of South Africa,

became an independent nation in 1990 under South Africa and the Germans and so on.

There was kind of like apartheid policies. So you would expect them to be very unequal.

Okay. So this is the most unequal country in the world, South Africa, right next door, this Namibia okay.

Highly inequality. So you're going to guess why.

What makes them unequal. Has to be racist right.

So. This is labor force participation rates.

This is unemployment rates. They have the same labor force participation rate us as South Africa.

And they have a super high powered, ridiculously high unemployment rate.

Uh, and this is the composition of the population. So 81% Africans, 18% European.

Okay. Ehm.

So you're going to say I know what's going to happen.

The inequality is between Africans and Europeans.

A and you might be partially true. The average income of Africans is 483.

The average income of Europeans is 723. So you can say, okay, that's part of the story, but this is the composition by different ethnic groups.

The only one bull are the dominant tribe. Some tribes are Bantu tribes that they are agriculturalists.

They came.

