[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Okay. Oh, yeah.

Where is it? Huh? Where is it?

You know what? I think we're cool with it. There's always a step back so that you can say thank you.

Well, if it's okay. With you.

Oh, but then you get in the way. Well, that's.

All right. Oh, I don't want to say it.

At all. I want you to know that.

I won't. I mean, even though we're going away, I want to say good night.

Hmm. You said you wanted to wait for the morning.

I say you say you didn't work for the family.

I don't want you to say no to where she practically played.

You know. I didn't want you to agree.

With my daughter. I'll give you another if you want.

So let's go. All right.

That was an eagle's nest. What the. Heck's.

Going on with you? Oh.

Uh, but, uh. Okay, so today I'm going to develop, uh, a model.

I think of it as a diagnostic macro model. Um, it's, I think the most useful model.

And maybe in line with, I don't know, ESM or something like that.

Okay. Um, but as opposed to SLM, it's more of a diagnostic model to help you make sense of things.

So that's where we are going.

Tomorrow there's going to be a lecture on sovereign debt restructuring that's organized by the Growth Lab with this guy,

Greg Markoff, who wrote a paper on on the Argentinian sovereign debt restructuring.

And. So where a problem set for is due next Wednesday, and I'm not sure that there will be a known electoral result by then.

Okay, so this is, uh, where we're going.

I'm going to present the BNN, uh, framework. Uh, and I'm going to enhance it with fiscal balance, private wealth and so on.

So we all understand this is my, um, my kind of preferred a decision tree of my modern, growth agnostic decision tree.

So output requires all of these things infrastructure, technology, capital, labor,

public goods, imported inputs and imported inputs are paid by exports or by borrowing.

And public goods are produced by with public resources, either taxation or borrowing,

and with some productivity parameter gamma, which is your ability to transform taxes into public goods.

And so there are many things that can be wrong in an economy. One of them is that maybe.

Imports are constraining output, or maybe imports are constraining output because exports are inadequate and exports might be inadequate,

maybe because there's a real exchange rate misalignment,

or maybe because the country doesn't have the required complexity, because it doesn't have the required technology, etc.

So kind of there are many possible things that can go wrong in an economy.

And this is, uh, an attempt to nest a bunch of possible explanations of what could be wrong in an economy.

Now, we saw the these these accounts last there in lecture.

Right. And remember, this is uh uh huh, uh, an accounting t where here our revenues,

your your our expenditures here our revenues, your assets, your liabilities.

And every line is, uh, transaction type. Um, this is just a current account.

Yeah. I mean, this is just, uh, transaction on goods and services,

so current transactions and and the thing I wanted to point out here is that, um, so, you know, there's an accounting identity by role.

This says that y equals c plus I plus g plus x minus m.

Right. And that's our well known definition of GDP here.

It says that you know wages paid by firms are received by households.

That interest payments made by firms and governments are received by households and the rest of the world.

Taxes are paid by households and firms and received by the government.

And this is an interesting line, which this is the surpluses of each one of the agents.

Okay. And it's just the, you know, the what makes these columns balance.

So y minus I minus w l minus I t f is equal to s f.

Right. Okay. But since this is a row I calculated each one of these things by the column.

But since this is a row this side has to add up to this side.

This side is zero. So this side must also be zero right.

Which means that it has to be quote minus s f plus s h plus s g.

Right. But SF x also has to be equal to M plus this thing plus the interest received minus our exports.

Right. So this is going to mean that this variable here, which we're going to spend a lot of time understanding,

is the current account of the balance of payments.

And it has at least three interpretations.

This equation here by the by the sum of these things is y minus c plus plus g minus interest payments.

This is what they call domestic absorption. This is the spending by residents okay.

This is a spending by residents. This is the income of residents.

This is a spending of residents. And this is interest payments to foreigners.

So this part Y minus C minus I'm going to see that its GDP minus domestic absorption is what they call the balance in goods and non factor services.

And when you add the factor services you get the current account.

Okay. So this means that the current account is something like the excess of income over spending of residents.

Okay. Why is a country, why does a country have a current account deficit.

Because residents are spending more than they're making.

Why is that the case? Because I told you in a previous lecture that income is equal to spending everywhere all the time.

Bank holidays at night, during the day, instantaneously.

Why is that the case? Because.

Sweating because it's two sides of the same coin.

Every time somebody is spending money, somebody is earning money.

So it has to be total, logically true. That's the beauty about accounting is that's the only part of economics that is true.

Okay. Now it is also the case that the current account is just x minus m minus id okay.

Which means there's a difference between our exports and our importance.

But both have to be true at the same time. Okay.

Both have to be true at the same time. Okay, so there are two different views of the current account.

And this is very important for you to understand and diagnose okay.

Very important. In addition the current account is equal to the capital account plus changes in international reserves.

Okay. So going back here.

This stuff has to equal to something that's going to happen here.

Its delta effects. Okay. So if foreigners want to take money out or put money in and so on, that's going to affect their current account.

Okay, so, for example, Diana, what do you know about Guyana?

Tell me something. You've heard about Guyana in the news. You should know.

Yeah. Yeah. Tell me something about Girma. They have a lot of.

They have go over to have a look. They have discovered that they have a lot of new oil.

Right. Okay. So what would you expect the current account of Guyana to be?

So Guyana has discovered a lot of oil. What would you expect the current account deficit to be?

Hi. Why? Uh, because they can discipline, consume now.

Because they know that they would be rich tomorrow. Yeah.

And. And why will they be rich tomorrow? Because they just overflowing.

And what do you need to do in order to exploit the fact that you discovered oil?

Uh, investment income, you know. So you have to invest now because you expect a future income.

So right now, you want to invest a lot because you discovered oil.

You might want to consume more because you know you're rich in the future.

So consumption goes up. Investment goes up. You would expect to find a large current account deficit in Guyana.

And why? Why can they afford a large current account deficit?

Well, because foreigners are willing to pour a lot of money into the country.

Okay, good. All right.

Now, interestingly enough, this thing here, the change in reserves, huh?

Is who holds the reserves?

Who holds the reserves? So the central bank.

Right? The central bank holds the reserves. Now, it just so happens that the central bank is a bank and a bank, as any other firm has a balance sheet.

Right? And the balance sheet of the central bank says they have.

A, uh, net international reserves.

Okay. Okay.

Or they call them net foreign assets. Net foreign assets.

Okay. And they have net domestic assets.

And what's on the liability side of the central bank? Huh?

Currency. Currency. We call it base money. Right.

So the central bank, you can imagine, it's a it's a bank that owns a printing press.

And they print money when they buy things. And what things do they buy?

They buy dollars, buy net foreign assets and they buy domestic credit.

So the amount of money that they print is the amount of assets that be bought.

But that means that this change in net foreign assets is equal to the change in base money, minus the change in domestic credit.

This has something to do with money demand. And this is the central bank lending to either to banks or to government or somebody.

So why is the central bank losing reserves?

Well, there are only two possible explanations, right?

One is that why is the central bank losing reserves either because people don't want the base money that the central bank is printing,

or the central bank is printing more money than people want. This is the increase in money demand.

This is an increase in money supply that's not backed with dollars.

So you lose reserves when the central bank prints more money than people want.

Okay. So this is kind of like. So and this is going to be down here.

This is going to have to do we know if you have in this balance sheet the central banks balance sheet,

it will mean that people are not demanding the money that the central bank printed.

And because they're not demanding the money in the central bank printed in the central bank loses reserves.

Okay. So again, the balance of payments has this is what they call the monetary approach to the balance of payments okay.

That's the monetary approach to balance of payments. All right.

So so now we have in our minds the basic accounting relationships right.

The central bank the current account is the difference between exports and imports plus interest payments.

But it's also the difference between the national income and the national spending.

Right. And it's also not the current account, but the overall balance is going to be the change in reserves.

And the change in reserves is something to do with having printed more money than people want.

All of these things are true simultaneously at the same time.

It doesn't mean that each one of these identities is the best way to explain the causality, right?

Typically, one of them is going to dominate others in.

Okay. So now I'm going to be developing the VBE. And now that we have a clear accounting framework in our head, we're going to develop a macro model.

And in my macro model there's going to be 2 or 3 parts of the economy.

Okay. Say one part of the economy is going to be the non-tradable sector.

And the non-tradable sector is going to be.

Uncannily similar to all markets that the economists typically think about.

Right. There's a supply. There's a demand. Okay.

Good. So now I'm going to write some equations for the market for tradable.

Now what's the difference between tradable and non-tradable. Yes.

Are good goods which we it's for which week.

What next for international market and laundry rebels are which are most people need uh consumers who exports the tradable uh,

there's almost no industries uh, industries where uh, to other countries.

The group markets. That's why make use of these things produced by home.

Industries and industries. Where in the country?

In the U.S.? Uh, then I disagree.

Then I what are tradable? Yes.

Travels are goods for whom the price is said. But you need the national market.

Okay. That's our consequence in some sense. Trade rebels are goods that can be traded, right?

That means that can be exported or they can be imported.

Right. So it's not necessary.

I wanted you to say buy any firm or something. So it tradable are goods that can be exported or imported because they can be exported or imported.

You wouldn't want to pay more for them if you can import them more cheaply,

and you're not going to sell them cheaply in your country if you can export them more dearly.

Okay, so the market for trade rebels, uh, does this look novel to you?

Except that now you can buy them in the international market or sell them in the international market.

Uh, and if you're assuming that your economy is relatively small relative to the international market,

then there's going to be something, like Paolo said, like an international price.

Now, the question is, okay, now there's an international price.

Where is the equilibrium? Where is the equilibrium?

Because now I see three places where lines cross.

Where is going to be the equilibrium. What's going to be the equilibrium?

Like the what? Huh. The point more to the right.

What what's going to happen here? Uh, um, so consumers are going to lay it on some, so we're going to consume XD.

Yeah, local producers are going to produce x s.

And what's the difference? Difference is the imports and the difference is imports.

Okay. So now something very important in the market for tradable is domestic firms are always on the supply curve.

Consumers are going to be on the demand curve. Producers are going to be on the supply curve.

And because producers are going to be on the supply curve. What's going to happen to production if I increase demand, for example, in this market,

in the market for Non-tradable s, what will happen if I increase demand?

For the local production? Yeah. So the government I don't know sends helicopter money and people spend part of that money in Non-tradable.

What's going to happen to the Non-tradable market?

One, the quantity produced locally stay the same. I like the bright international in the in the market for non-tradable as I said.

I went back to market for non-tradable. What? Yes.

Get the demands like shift I you know the price. My tax has been affected seen by a small people move the industry then produce one of my tables.

Right. So in some sense and when I'm asking you to do is to take ups, is to take this curve.

You see this this curve. I know this curve.

Right. It's the one in my hand. Quantity of price.

And move it here. Right.

So increase demand. So quantity increases and the price increases.

So if you stimulate demand in non-tradable you get output going up okay.

But if you increase demand in the market for tradable what happens.

Nothing happens to domestic production. Demand goes up but imports go up.

So if you increase demand for tradable demand, if you increase demand for tradable then non-tradable output of non tradable goes up.

Output of tradable doesn't go up okay.

Imports go up. Good okay.

Now if ehm if I devalue the currency.

So I increase the relative price of tradable silver non-tradable.

By the way the idea is that this international price.

Is call it p t p t star.

That's the international price in dollars. The domestic price of tradable is going to be the international price of tradable times the exchange rate.

Okay. So if I depreciate the exchange rate okay the domestic price of tradable goes up.

And if the domestic price of tradable goes up what's going to happen.

Well I want to produce more tradable because now they're more expensive.

I make more money, I want to supply more, but because they are more expensive now, people want to buy fewer of them.

So demand goes down. So something that was being imported now can become an export.

Okay. So if I depreciate the real exchange rate.

Imports go down, exports go up. If I increase demand, imports go up, exports go down.

Okay. That's the production of tradable is depends on the real exchange rate of production of tradable depends on the real exchange rate.

If aim demand goes up, not and nothing happens to a real exchange rate, demand goes up,

a production of non-tradable goes up, but production of tradable doesn't move.

And because demand went up, demand for tradable is went up. But production of tradable didn't go up.

Imports went up. So your current account weakens. Okay.

So those are all the intuitions you need to know to understand this.

I call it the macroeconomics map okay.

And this is where we are going to explain everything. So the world in a napkin okay.

This is the real exchange rate up here means depreciation.

You know more pesos per dollar down means appreciation.

Fewer pesos per dollar okay. And this is domestic demand.

Okay. I am going to inform you, in my infinite wisdom, that this point here is a point of external balance.

Okay? The external accounts are in balance, I informed you, right.

Okay. Now, if this point is in balance and now I move in this direction, I increase demand and I keep the real exchange rate constant.

What will happen to the external balance? Yes.

Um, it will weaken because you will have an increase of imports.

Correct. So if I'm here, I was in balance.

I move in this direction. I'm increasing demand of everything tradable and non-tradable.

But the demand for trade doubles goes up. The production of trade doubles doesn't go up because you are in the supply curve of tradable switch.

Depends only on the real exchange rate. Okay. So it means that demand went up.

Supply didn't go up. You imported more. So this was balanced.

This is a point of deficit of any quote.

So let's go back here. And this now is I told you this is a point of balance right?

I keep demand constant, but I depreciate the real exchange rate.

What's going to happen to the current account? The external balance.

Exponential. So we keep demand constant. So demand for tradable and non-tradable is constant.

But you depreciate the real exchange rate.

What will happen Alvaro. Exports would go up.

So we are going toward deficit but we are going to have a surplus.

Why? Because now it's more profitable to make more tradable.

But it's not nice to consume more tradable because they're more expensive.

So consumption of tradable doesn't go up. Production of tradable goes up.

Now we have an excess of tradable excess supply of tradable that you are going to export.

And consequently that's the point of surplus. So if this is a point of surplus and this is a point of deficit.

And this is a point of surplus, and here's a point of deficit somewhere in between.

I must be in balance again. Right? Somewhere in between.

I must be in balance again. And that is the curve.

So what's the idea of the curve? If I was in balance here and I increase demand now increase the imports.

So in order for me to go back to balance I have to depreciate the exchange rate.

So I get more production of tradable. So I go back to balance. Okay.

So any point on this curve is a point of external balance okay.

Where increases in demand have to be balanced by improvements in competitiveness.

If you want to buy by depreciating the real exchange rate so that the increased demand for tradable

gets supplied by increased domestic production of tradable Bobigny Europe where it's super clear right.

That's incredibly clear. Right. So points below the b b curve.

Our points of deficit points above the b b curve are points of surplus okay.

So whenever you ask a question why what does the current account is in surplus or in deficit.

You know are you above or below the b b curve. I want to call this a macro economist map.

Because if I told you if I told you this is the map of Boston.

And you say, well, but. And this is my office.

You say, but you know you should draw something else in the map.

Because if you don't draw, where are the roads or where is the river?

Or worse? I don't know the Boston Commons or where is Harvard Square.

It's not very useful, right? So if you want to make it into a useful map, you have to draw some stuff in the map.

So that you now can orient yourself, right?

Well, so now I have drawn a curve in the map where the external accounts are in balance.

So now I know where the external accounts are in balance. By the way, good external news.

Move the VB curve to the right. Because, say this one was a point of balance here.

And now something good happened. The price of your exports went up.

So before this was a point of balance. But with the new prices this is no longer a point of balance.

It's a point of surplus. It means that the VB curve must have moved to the right.

Okay, so good news. Move the VB curve to the right. Bad moves move the VB curve to the left.

Okay, so now we have the curve. Good. Let me put this in equations.

Sometimes in equations it's easier to understand.

Output is a function of trade levels and is the GDP is the production of tray tables plus the production of non-tradable,

maybe plus a third sector, which I'm going to think of it as manna from heaven.

Okay, so it seems like the oil sector doesn't employ anybody, but employs very few few people but generates a lot of money.

So it's sort of like a shift parameter. If you are thinking of an aid dependent country, Z can be like international aid.

I'm going to write this equation in units of trade US.

Okay. So. A tray.

Tables are measured in units of tradable. So I want to measure this in units of triangles x n is measured in units of Non-tradable.

X n is measured in units of non-tradable but this variable q q, which is the real exchange rate I'm going to define as BP.

Sorry, is this one over Q yeah, BP over p m it's the price of tradable over the price of non traders.

The price of tradable is just the international price times the exchange rate.

So if you think a star is one.

So kind of like it's just kind of like the exchange rate and then it's like the domestic prices.

So this is like the real exchange rate. Okay. So when I multiply x n.

Times one over q that means I multiply by p n.

Over dt. Okay.

This is one over q right. So x n times p n is like a the the value of non-tradable output in units of non-tradable.

But I'm going to divide by dt to make it in units of tradable.

So now this thing is measured in units of tradable.

And I'm going to measure z in units of trades. Okay.

So output is simply the output of tradable plus the output of non-tradable plus say oil.

Manna from heaven. Okay. The production of tray tables is going to depend on the real exchange rate.

The demand for non-tradable has to equal the output of non-tradable.

Because you cannot export the Non-tradable, you cannot import the Non-tradable.

So if you demand them, somebody has to produce them. Okay.

So this is a demand determined sector like we saw before.

I am going to assume that people like to spend a fraction of their income in tradable and a function one minus alpha of their income in Non-tradable.

Here I have to multiply by q, because this is why is in units of tradable and multiplied by dt that in like money divided by p m.

That's in units of non-tradable. Okay. So this is demand from Non-tradable.

So demand for non-tradable output of Non-tradable is demand determined.

And it's going to be a function of how much income there is in the economy and how much people want to spend their income in Non-tradable.

Okay. So. It has to be that my supply of tradable, which is XD plus manna from heaven has to equal the demand for tradable, which is just a way.

Okay, so this thing is going to be in in surplus.

So DV equals zero. That is the external accounts x t plus z minus a y.

That's going to be in balance.

If I have a so so the curve that is the curve in which this thing is equal to zero is such that if I increase the real exchange rate B goes up.

If I increase demand b goes down. So increases.

And real exchange rate has to be balanced by increases in demand.

And that's why the supply the curve is upward sloping. Is that clear.

What. Okay. So that's simply that's that's my B curve.

So let me ask you it. Well so the real exchange rate is is the price of tradable silver.

The price of non-tradable up here is depreciation.

Okay. In many datasets you will find up is appreciation.

So you always have to check a you know the IMF loves to put up as an appreciation the Latin way the Latin American way of doing things,

which is obviously the correct way of doing things up is depreciation.

Okay. So check out in your data set if ehm, if, if you know which way they're counting.

And then there is a question of what do you mean by external balance.

One way to think of external balance is that the current account deficit is zero.

Now the current account deficit is equal to the net accumulation of liabilities.

That's going to be. So how did you have a deficit. Well you either used your assets or you borrowed you issued liabilities.

Right. Now in a growing economy GDP is going up.

You would want maybe the debt to GDP ratio to remain stable.

Okay. And in in a growing economy, the debt for the debt to GDP ratio to to remain stable.

If GDP is going up the debt has to go up. And the question is how quickly should the debt go up.

So that the debt GDP ratio remains constant.

And that is going to be determined by this equation that says that the trade balance, excluding interest payments,

has to be equal to r minus g times the debt to GDP ratio R minus g sound rings a bell.

You saw that in macro right? So you're paying interest to the tune of R.

But the denominator is growing to the tune of G.

Okay.

So for the debt to GDP ratio to remain constant, the balance in exports and imports excluding interest payments has to be equal to this thing okay.

So for example, if the interest rate is 10% and the growth rate of the economy is 4% and your debt to GDP ratio is 50%,

it means that you can run a trade balance surplus of 3%, since you will have 50% of GDP in debt times an interest rate of 10%.

That means you are paying interest for 5% of GDP.

You're running a 3% surplus in the trade balance.

The trade balance, minus the interest you paid is 5%.

You're running a current account deficit of 2%, and a current account deficit of 2% is consistent with keeping the debt to GDP ratio constant.

Okay. If, for example, the economy was growing at 10% and the interest rate was 4%.

Now R minus G is negative. And now you could be running a deficit.

So for example if R is 4% R and this is 10% then and four minus ten is minus six minus six times that, would you repay the GDP ratio.

50% means that you can run a 3% trade balance deficit.

So you're running a 3% deficit. Plus you're paying 2% in interest, 4% times 50%.

You're running a current account deficit of 5%. But that still will keep the debt to GDP ratio constant.

Because you're paying 4% in interest.

But the GDP the denominator is growing at ten. Okay. So it's important to know when you decide are you above or below the curve.

Not take you know is the current account surplus or in deficit. But is it at a place where the debt to GDP ratio goes up or not or not?

Okay. Now let me ask you what is the equilibrium real exchange rate.

Define for me the equilibrium real exchange rate. What would you want to call the equilibrium real exchange rate.

You get partial credit for wrong answers.

But yes, it might be where the supply and demand of like tradable the non-tradable sort of balance each other.

That's the supply and demand of which are tradable is, for example, domestic demand and uh,

like supply sort of international end of tradable version supply and demand.

Okay. So why don't we say it's where the b b curve is in bonds.

So the real exchange rate is where the b b curve is imbalanced.

The equilibrium real exchange rate. Right. Wrong.

Right. Because um where by definition the real exchange rate is imbalance in any point on the curve.

So there are many, many real exchange rates that will balance the b b curve if you adjust the demand.

So. But you might.

Yes. Okay.

Um, I think you gave a hint. I'm just guessing. Isn't it, like, supposed to be another curve with balance?

Uh, right. Right. Right, right. You cannot put one curve without a second curve that crosses.

Otherwise, it's not a model, right?

Uh huh. So it means that maybe you are able to, um.

To to maybe you are able to achieve something else besides balancing the curve.

Like, what would you want to achieve? I remember that, um, internal balance, uh, internal balance.

Good. And what what would you want to call internal balance and the name of a curve?

No, no, not the name. I'm. It's going to be the end curve because this is a B and then model.

But but what what what what policy goal would you like to achieve?

Um, it's a situation where you don't want to overheat or you wanted to, like, run.

Um. Uh huh. Expectations. Or perhaps like you can target for employment, full employment.

What a beautiful word. Beautiful employment.

So. So let's try to achieve full employment.

Okay. Good. So now I am going to inform you that this point here is a point of full employment.

And I'm going to play the same trick with you again. I am here in full employment and I'm going to increase the demand of everything.

What's going to happen to the labor market?

I'm already in full employment and now there's more demand. Oh yes.

Inflation. Right. We're going to call that overheating because now there's going to be excess demand for labor.

Right. I'm keeping the real exchange rate constant.

So I increase demand. Demand for non-tradable is goes up. So demand for labor in the non-tradable sector goes up.

But I was already at full employment, so now it must be overheating.

Okay, so let's go back to full employment. And now let me keep the man constant.

And I'm going to appreciate the real exchange rate.

What's going to happen to labor demand. What will happen to labor demand if I appreciate the exchange rate?

Well, the non-tradable sector is demand determined. So nothing has happened to demand.

So probably nothing happens to the demand for labor in the non-tradable sector.

But now what happens in the tradable sector? They voluntarily reduce demand.

Will reduce. Why export? Because exports will become expensive.

Right. Because I'm going to move down the supply curve. Right.

I'm going to be moving down this curve. Right. So I'm going to be demanding less labor.

It's going to be less competitive. My tradable sector I don't want workers there.

So. So if I move down.

I'm going to be firing workers from the tradable sector, because now it's less competitive and I'm going to be hearing a point of unemployment.

So if here is a point of overheating, here is a point of unemployment since all functions are continuous and infinitely differentiable.

That's not true. But I mean, it's what they call Newton's first law.

So it must be that somewhere in between, there's another point of unemployment.

Where if you want. If you are at full employment and you increase demand, you have to appreciate the exchange rate.

Because if you are in full employment and you increase demand, you want more workers in the non-tradable sector, but there are no more workers.

So you have to get them out of a tradable sector and to get them out of the tradable sector,

you appreciate the exchange rate to kick them out of the tradable sector so that they are they can be hired by the non-tradable sector.

Okay. So now we have the curve above the curve, our points of overheating below the and curves our points of deficit okay.

These are the equations that are in the background. The demand for labor in the tradable sector depends on the real exchange rate.

The demand for labor in the non-tradable sector depends on demand overall demand.

It's a demand determined sector.

The demand for labor in the tradable sector, plus the demand for labor in the non-tradable sector, has to equal the supply of labor.

Okay. So the curve is a curve for this thing.

You know, L minus demand etc. is zero. So there's no excess demand or supply of labor.

So if you are in the curve and a movement of appreciation causes, uh, deficit I Q going up is a depreciation, right?

So it increases the demand for labor in the tradable sector who want to become more competitive.

You want to demand more labor in more light, because with Q this goes up.

So in order to go back to full employment, you have to lower demand so that the increase in the demand for labor in the tradable

sector is compensated by a reduction in the demand for labor in the non-tradable sector.

Okay. So that's why the curve is downward sloping. Increases and Q have to be balanced by reductions in Y.

Okay. Okay.

So now we have our this is our diagnostic tool.

This is our diagnostic tool. If you for example go to work in your country and then and you you you have a lot of documents.

You are expecting to read all those documents in the airplane.

But since you're working for the world Bank or they're paying you business class, and the moment you sit on the airplane.

They serve you champagne. And then after that, you know, they serve your meal with wine, etc.

So by the time you finish your meal, you're drunk and you don't do any readings.

So you land, you take a taxi, you say, I didn't do any reading.

What can I say? So you ask the taxi driver. Tell me, is is it easy to get jobs or is it very hard to get jobs?

He says no, no, it's super hard. You know, send CVS everywhere.

Nobody has. Okay, so there's unemployment. So I'm below the an anchor okay.

And you ask him, you know, how many dollars are they becoming. You know, is it hard to get dollars.

Difficult to get those. Oh no. Very hard to get dollars and all the exchange rate or something.

So you're in deficit, right? So now you know where you are.

Okay. So, uh, you just need to figure out in which one of these quadrants you happen to be.

Okay, so a. If a team has cheated and a has, um, um, created this, uh,

b in an estimation where they have assume that, uh, you are above or below the b b curve, if, you know,

based on your current account balance as a percent of GDP,

they should have maybe corrected for interest payments or some of the debt to GDP ratio or minus G or something.

Right. But let's just say that it's, uh, current account balance and.

And for the curve, they ask the question. Are wages going faster than productivity or wages growing more slowly than productivity?

So presumably if the economy is overheating, wages are going faster than productivity.

If the economy is in unemployment, maybe wages are falling relative to productivity.

And so they kind of try to estimate where the [INAUDIBLE] are countries in this in this situation.

Okay. So I want you to use the VB n n curve to try to understand the imbalances in your economy in the short term.

Okay. Now. A way, the real exchange rate.

Is very much related. So. The price of tradable is like the exchange rate.

Okay. The price of non-tradable is a little bit like the wage rate.

Okay. So this variable Q is a little bit like dough and the exchange rate over the wages.

If you invert that wages over the exchange rate it's like your wages in dollars.

Okay. So think of the real exchange rate a little bit like the wages in dollars.

And you could ask yourself you know a real appreciation means that wages in dollars are going up.

Depreciation means wages in dollars are going down okay.

Now presumably people feel happier when wages in dollars are high and they feel less happy when wages in dollars are low.

Many things are priced in dollars like gasoline, like cars.

So transportation costs that we talked about in the previous lecture and so on, so on.

So let's assume that there's a certain wage rate in dollars that keeps the social peace.

If you push wages and dollars below a certain level, people will get pissed off.

Okay, so let's assume that this curve here is like a curve of social peace.

If that's the case, then you're having a trilemma problem that you can achieve.

A full employment and social peace, but at the cost of having a deficit,

you can achieve in a social peace and external balance, but have the cost of having unemployment.

Or you can have him on a external balance and internal balance,

but at the cost of not having social peace because people don't like the equilibrium wage.

Okay. So.

Okay. So. So this.

So I told you a little bit how to how to find out where you are in the map even though you are drunk.

No, but this map is going to be different from the Islam curve or the Iceland map in the sense that in in the Islam model,

raise your hand if you don't know what I'm talking about. If we don't know.

If you don't know, you don't know what the Iceland model is.

Oh. My head. Okay, well, so then don't worry.

Uh, the Iceland model is the basic game model in macroeconomics.

It stands for investment savings balance. And LM stands for balance in the money market.

And the liquidity demand is equal to money supply.

But the point of the model is that there are two curves the IRS curve and the LM curve.

Two curves. Uh, but the economy has to be on those curves.

By definition, the economy has to be on those curves. In the BBN model, the economy does not have to be in the curve.

Economy is typically not in those curves. The economy is outside of those curves.

The economy is in some kind of imbalance. And this is a model that allows you to figure out what kind of imbalance is the economy in.

Okay. So.

You have to decide if the current account balance is above or below where quote unquote should be and should be,

maybe to keep the debt to GDP ratio constant.

We already saw the calculation of how to do it.

Maybe you want to say, well, but this year the export price is unusually high or it's unusually low.

So maybe the economy is above the curve now.

But I don't think the b b curve will stay there. The VB curve will move because prices will go back to normal prices.

And and the VB curve won't be as high now. So maybe this is a temporary surplus, not a permanent solution.

And the curve you have to have some idea of what is the equilibrium rate of unemployment.

And we talked in a previous lecture about the rule which I said was not a not an Indian prime minister.

Right. It's the non accelerating inflation rate of unemployment.

And I told you why. Spanish is a superior language right.

That it's a rate of unemployment at which inflation does not accelerate.

But it's a rate of unemployment. Okay. So you want to know if the unemployment rate is above or below where it should be.

Okay, good. So then everything here is a Nintendo game.

So macroeconomic policy is a Nintendo game.

Nintendo is, you know, the old games. I mean, before you were born, probably you had and you had two, two buttons.

One moves up and down and the other move left and right.

And so you have to decide where you want to move up or down or left and right.

That's the only game. So demand management policies moves you horizontally.

An exchange rate policies moves you vertically. Okay.

There's going to be an automatic adjustment mechanism.

But it might be too slow for you if the economy is in surplus.

It means people are making more money than they're spending.

It means next year they're going to be richer than they are now.

Other things equal, they'll have more money to spend next year.

So if you're in surplus, there is going to be a tendency for demand to increase in the future because you're becoming richer.

Okay. If you're overheated.

Wages are going up. So the real exchange rate is coming down.

So if you're in this situation, you're going to be tending to move in this direction.

If you are in this part of a curve, you're in deficit.

So next year you're going to be poorer than this year.

You're going to have more debt than this year. Okay. So you're going to be wanting to spend less money next year.

And in addition you're overheated. So wages are going up.

So you know the real exchange rate is coming down. Okay.

So you're going to be moving in this direction. And here you are in deficit.

So you're becoming poorer. So you're going to we want to move in this direction.

But there's unemployment. So wages are not going up.

Okay. So maybe the real exchange rate is becoming more competitive.

So you'll be moving in this direction and so on. So the idea is that the economy would have some automatic stabilizers.

But these automatic stabilizers may not work fast enough.

And you may get into trouble, for example, run out of international reserves or something in the middle.

Okay, good. So for example, let me give you an example in I told you that Growth Diagnostics was born in El Salvador.

And this was part of the analysis we did in El Salvador.

This is the real exchange rate came down, is a appreciation for countries becoming more expensive.

Okay. And this is big.

It was at 1.6 and we went down to 0.6.

So it's an appreciation of more than 50%. Okay.

Big appreciation. So you're going to ask yourself the question, was that an equilibrium appreciation or was that, uh, this equilibrium phenomenon?

So how would you know? What would you want to look at?

So the real exchange rate is appreciating. But would your concern be.

What will happen to exports, Chris?

What will happen to imports and exports?

So the current account deficit should be deteriorating, right.

So let's look at exports and imports. This is the balance in goods and services.

It was running say around the deficit of 3%. And it became a deficit of 15%.

So that's a huge deficit right.

Deficit of 15% of GDP. That's a huge deficit. Right. So we say how the [INAUDIBLE] did they pay for that deficit?

Well, remittances were going up to 15% of GDP.

Okay, so when you look at the current account that includes the remittances, the current account is stable.

This deficit in the trade balance is compensated by the surplus in in remittances.

So it doesn't look like the current account is moving anywhere, even though you have this massive real appreciation.

You say, how the [INAUDIBLE] could that have happened? Okay.

Well. So here we are, putting them all together.

Remittances went up, the trade balance deteriorated and the real exchange rate appreciated.

So let's try to explain it in the VB and in curve.

How would you express the fact that remittances went up?

Huh? Which curve moves? I now tell you.

Now we're going to move the curves. Remittances went up.

Something happened that remittances went up. That's a good news or a bad news for the balance of payments.

Huh? It's good news, right? Remittances went up, right.

What happened? Why did remittances go up? Why do you think remittances go up?

What could have caused remittances to go up in El Salvador?

Yes. Because people who are moving migrate to the other country.

People left there. People left. So if they left, they're no longer in El Salvador.

And if they're no longer in El Salvador, what has happened to the labor supply?

Decrease. Decrease. Decreased. Okay, so we have some news on the balance of payments.

We got more remittances, but we have some news on the labor market that we have fewer workers.

So you have fewer workers. The curve moves to the left but they send money.

You have more remittances. So as a consequence, the real exchange rate appreciates a lot, right.

And now you are importing more, but you are importing more and paying for those imports with remittances.

And you're losing demand for labor. But you have fewer workers because they left.

Okay. So the real appreciation in El Salvador was an equilibrium phenomenon, a consequence of the fact that these two curves move in this direction.

Okay. By Benny Goodman.

So, for example, in 2008, China had a current account surplus of more than 10% of GDP,

and in addition, it had net foreign direct investment inflows of 4% of GDP.

That's humongous. Ridiculously high. Okay, so kind of like the b b curve was you're above the Bebe curve right?

And in addition they had speculative inflows because they had such a big surplus that people anticipated that there was going to be an appreciation.

So they wanted to be holding yuan before the exchange rate appreciation to gain from the capital gain.

So so they're definitely above the Bebe curve.

The central bank was buying reserves as if it was going out of fashion.

We went from $1 trillion to 3 or $4 trillion.

And the central bank was trying to sterilize all that money coming in by issuing stabilization bonds and stuff.

And in addition, there was there were pressures on inflation.

So the current account went into a big surplus. Aim investment was already at kind of like sky high at 40% of GDP.

So and inflation was accelerating.

So you might say maybe the economy is kind of like overheating.

So you would say maybe the economy is in surplus.

It's above the b b curve but maybe also overheating.

So maybe it's over here. Okay.

It's in surplus and overheating. And the question is what would you want China to do?

The US was very pissed off at the time because China was exporting like crazy and accumulating reserves and so on.

They were saying they were a currency manipulator and they wanted China to appreciate.

China did not want to appreciate. And why did China not want to appreciate?

Well, they didn't want to appreciate because they thought if I appreciate to get to external balance.

And that's a big appreciation because the external balance surplus is 10% of GDP.

I may get to the b b curve, but at this level of demand I would be below the curve.

I would be in unemployment. So I don't want to appreciate because I worry about unemployment.

So maybe what I need to do is to combine maybe some appreciation but with some expansionary policies.

So you want to know not straight down but to the right. And then you might ask yourself a question.

Do I want to do it with monetary policy. Do I want to do it with fiscal policy.

With fiscal policy, you can decide where you want, where you do it.

You can decide, well, the coastal cities have been growing a lot.

They want more growth in, in, in in other provinces.

You can do that with fiscal policy. You cannot do that really with monetary policy.

Right. So you you might have. You might have decided to do it with fiscal policy.

Okay. So that's a little bit how you would use the VB and then curve in in the process of analyzing.

Is this a normal thing. What could be happening here etc.

Okay. That's now.

Because. Yes. But ultimately China did, because they did something like that.

They had a stimulus package. I mean, infrastructure construction boom, fiscal policy.

So. Now I'm going to add two more curves since life was so easy with a VB.Net curve.

I'm going to make it a little bit more complicated. The first thing I'm going to add is a curve in which the fiscal deficit is in balance.

Okay, now you realize that the fiscal deficit is going to depend on how much you spend in tray tables.

I'm going to measure the fiscal deficit in units of Non-tradable.

So a m. It's how much the government spends in tray tables multiplied by q, which is p p over pencil.

This is in units of tradable. So times criticals is in money divided by Non-tradable is in units of non-tradable.

Plus how much you spend in non-tradable s k plus how much you paid in foreign debt.

Interest payments on foreign debt times the exchange rate,

plus how much you paid in domestic interest rates minus, um, how much you tax the tradable sector.

Since the tradable is in units of tradable, I have to multiply by Q so that it becomes in units of non-tradable minus.

How much I tax the non-tradable sector, which is, you know,

alpha times D is how much you demand non-tradable one minus alpha times B is how much you demand tradable.

Okay. Okay. So here I have these are my taxes.

These are my revenues. Note that they depend on demand on the and they depend on the real exchange rate.

And this base that I'm exploring is a space of demand and real exchange rate.

So the fiscal deficit is going to depend on the level of demand.

And it's going to depend on the real exchange rate. So in this space, there's going to be an endogenous fiscal deficit.

Okay. Okay. Now the fiscal deficit curve.

This FD equals zero curve is going to be a place where changes in the real exchange rate are compensated by changes in demand.

Okay. And the question is is this positive or negative.

Well increases in demand increase revenues because people spend more money you tax them.

Revenues go up. But depreciation does have an uncertain impact on the real exchange rate on the fiscal deficit.

And that's going to depend on whether your taxing trade doubles more than you're paying in foreign debt.

And spending in Incredibles. Okay. It depends if you want on the the surplus or deficit in the government's balance of payments.

If the government, for example, the government of Chile taxes a lot copper and has a relatively small foreign debt,

then a devaluation in Chile raises government revenues because the copper sector is going to pay more money.

In Argentina, a the government.

Well, that may be a bad example. In most countries that have a large foreign debt,

a devaluation might increase the cost of debt more than it increases the revenue from the tradable sector.

This variable is going to be super important.

It's a super important variable. If. Depreciation are good for the government or bad for the government.

Okay. If depreciation are good for the government is going to be more stabilizing than if it's bad for the government.

Okay. So. A hefty curve depends on whether the government has a surplus or a deficit in its balance of payments.

So I'm going to illustrate this with two polar cases.

One is Venezuela back when in the good times and Venezuela now.

Okay. So those are the two little things.

So Venezuela back when we had a lot of oil and very little debt.

So a devaluation meant that oil revenues go up.

You tax them you get more money. Okay. Now before that is huge.

And the oil sector is much smaller. So now devaluations means that debt service becomes higher than than the impact on oil revenues.

Okay. So in in good times because that is when when when the are good for the government the FD curve slopes down.

Because an increase in demand. Gets you into a surplus because the government is going to get more tax revenues.

So you want to do something that hurts the government and what hurts the government and appreciation.

That's why the curve shift down points above the off the curve are points of surplus, and points below the curve are points of fiscal deficit.

So now we're talking about fiscal deficits not external deficits okay.

Um, if if, uh, if devaluations are bad for the government, then the f the curve.

Slopes up and points above the curve are now points of deficit before.

Points above the curve or points of surplus and other points of deficit and below their points of surplus.

Okay, this is going to matter. So one of the things you want to find out about your countries, and we should ask them,

is to figure out what the impact of devaluations on, on, on the public sector.

Okay. I'm going to add another curve, which is very simple.

It's what's happening to private wealth now.

M. We know that.

M. M. If the bicker.

If you are in the current account, your in surplus. The country is getting richer as a whole.

Okay. If the government is in an equal surplus,

then the government is getting the country is getting richer as a whole because the government is getting richer.

But nothing is happening to a private sector. If there's a current account surplus and the government is not getting richer so it's not in a surplus,

then it must be that the private sector is getting richer. So this is going to be a in what's happening to private sector wealth.

Private sector wealth is going to be the fiscal deficit plus the current account surplus.

So the private sector must be getting richer if the government is in deficit, because the government is in deficit because it's print,

it's issuing debt, and the households must own the debt, and if not, they're not owning the debt.

It's because the foreigners are owning that. That's. But then I mean a current account deficit.

So current account surplus means I am accumulating foreign assets.

Fiscal deficit means that I'm accumulating public debt.

Either way I'm accumulating assets. So this is the private sector wealth.

And interestingly, it means that this delta A equals zero curve must be at a place where FD crosses b b because if B is zero and FDR zero,

then delta A has to be zero okay.

And but the RR curve means that fiscal deficits are being compensated by balance of payments deficits,

and fiscal surpluses are compensated by balance of payments surpluses.

If the government is in surplus, it means it's paying down its debt.

So I'm having less government debt. But if the balance of payments is in surplus, it means that I must be accumulating foreign assets.

So I am accumulating less public debt, more foreign assets.

I my wealth remains constant. Okay. So.

So if this is the B curve and this is the curve, then the curve must be like this.

In good times it means where points where fiscal surpluses are compensated by balance payments

surpluses and fiscal deficits are compensated by a balance of payments surplus deficit.

So so it's a curve like that okay. Okay.

So in in in both cases, in the case of the the f the curve instead of sloping down it slopes up.

This in cases when depreciation are bad for the government then the delta e equals zero curve is going to cross.

This way okay. Is going to be between the Beebe curve and the f d curve.

Good. So. So let me.

Let me assume a country that A is like say, Saudi Arabia or UAE better.

It's in a point where the curve crosses the curve.

I mean, it's a point like this one where this is the BP curve.

This is in a curve, the BP curve. This is the FD equals zero curve.

It's downward sloping because it was a country that gets a lot of money from oil.

So if they devalue they'll get more revenue. And this is a point where the delta A equals zero curve crosses the Indian curve.

That's a point where the private sector is in balance and the economy is in full employment,

but the private sector is in balance and the economy is in full employment when the current account is in surplus.

So the economy is forever accumulating reserves. The government is running a surplus and there's no problem.

They can do that forever because they can always accumulate reserves.

Now suppose that. The curve crosses the delta equals zero curve here.

Here the government is in deficit and the balance of payments is in deficit.

So you're borrowing from the rest of the world. But presumably this is in a situation where the public debt is rising and the external debt is rising.

Right. Because we we drew this curve to keep the debt to GDP ratio constant.

So now we are in.

