[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
I. Did.

Not want to be Prime Minister. Came out.

Yeah, you can say that. You might.

You can do this. Yes. So I can sleep.

Hello? Hello. Okay, so.

Well happy Halloween. Happy Halloween. Um, so today we are going to talk about diagnosing balance of treatments problems in concrete settings.

So what we started last last the class hopefully will provide us with a framework to to think about these issues.

All right. Where's the control? All right, all right.

Good. So it's some housekeeping announcements.

Um, no. No. Okay.

No housekeeping at I am. Okay.

So, um, so I have this idea that output A requires a bunch of inputs.

One input might be infrastructure, another input might be technology.

Call that letters. Right. So I think knowledge is reflected in the country's complexity.

Another input might be capital say domestic capital.

The kinds of things that you can get from banks or other financial institutions and so on and so on.

Firms have access to money with which they can buy other inputs, labor and non labor market institutions that we discussed,

uh, you know, minimum wages, transportation costs, whatever that might affect access to labor, public goods.

Right.

And these public goods are loose by governments that have access to some resources where these resources come from taxes or comes from borrowing.

And this gamma is kind of like a, um, a parameter of how effectively a government can transfer money into public goods.

Okay. So some countries might be bumping against, uh, constraint from public goods.

And that's, that's what our gross diagnostic of South Africa ended up arguing that South Africa was a country that

had a very good state in terms of its capacity to provide public goods and was losing that capacity.

So it was certainly an increase in the constraint, that is the economy presume the existence of some public goods that were now in dwindling supply.

That was a growth diagnostic there. But today we're going to focus on to produce you need inputs.

You need raw materials, you need intermediate inputs.

You need spare parts, you need machines, you need stuff.

And if if you cannot buy them, then maybe output will be constrained because you don't have the imports.

And the question is why don't you have the imports? Well, you may not have the imports because you cannot pay for them.

You cannot pay for them either because you don't export or because you don't borrow.

Right. And why is it that you can't export?

Well, maybe you can't export because, you know, you don't have the letters you were trapped in making small words and so on.

So there's might be a complexity story behind the fact that you cannot export, or it may just be a real exchange rate misalignment, right.

That then, you know, you have a misaligned exchange rate and consequently a foreign exchange is poorly allocated,

meaning strategically allocated or something so many firms cannot get their hands on dollars with which to import.

Okay. So as any decision tree, this is meant to kind of try to capture any possible thing that could go wrong.

I'm not saying that all you know, I'm not saying which one goes wrong,

but the whole point about growth diagnostics is to figure out which is the one that might be the story.

Okay. In the last lecture we developed this model.

Right. It's called the BBN model. This is the change right here in this setting.

It's a relative price of tradable to non-tradable.

So it's a relative price of international prices to domestic prices if you want another way to think about it.

It's the inverse of wages in dollars okay.

And the idea is that this is like the map of Boston.

But how would you know. It's a map of Boston. Well, because somewhere has to be Cambridge and somewhere is the Charles River.

Somewhere is is, you know, the Boston Common somewhere is stuff.

Right? The Museum of Fine Arts, that's what makes it a bank of, uh, a map of Boston.

Well, what makes this a macroeconomics map is that you've drawn into the map some interesting places and one interesting places.

Where is the where is the external balance?

Where is the external account? Where are the external accounts? In balance.

And another interesting point would be where is the labor market in full employment.

Right. So we know that arm the curve has to be upward sloping.

Because if I increase demand in the economy the economy will want to import more.

And so if you start from a point of equilibrium and you wanted to go to a point.

The deficit. If you want to go back to equilibrium, it means you need to have a more competitive exchange rate.

So you need a depreciation.

And that's why in the VB curve, increases in demand are compensated for with increases in competitiveness if you want okay.

That's why it's upward sloping. The full employment curve.

The curve is downward sloping because if you increase demand you'll increase the demand for

labor in the non-tradable sector because the non-tradable sector is demand determinants.

You know, there's more demand for haircuts. You have to produce more haircuts, right?

You cannot import haircuts. So if you start from full employment, increased demand, it will lead to an overheated economy.

To get back to equilibrium. We need to discourage employment in an employment.

And one way to discourage employment is to appreciate the real exchange rate that will make the tradable sector less competitive,

and the tradable sector will shed labor. So getting you back to full employment.

Am I being super clear and transparent, or are you so confused that no one is interrupting me?

Super clear. Yeah. Well, yeah.

We looked at the accounting system, and the nice thing about the accounting system is that this external balance variable here.

Is determined by a lot of things from a pure identity point of view.

It has to be by definition identical to exports minus imports minus the interest burden.

Right. So there has to be that.

And that's how it's published. You can look at the balance of. That's how it will be published.

But it also has to be that the external balance is the excess income over spending of residence, which is the sum of this role.

Right. But it also has to be that the external balance has to be whatever got funded in these sources and use this account.

It has to be. So we are going to have four ways of looking at the current account.

And the question is which one is sort of like the driving force and which ones are just the rest of the accounting relationships.

Okay. So.

So that's what I just said. There's the monetary approach comes from just the balance sheet of the central bank that if you want,

the overall balance of payments is equal to change in international reserve, said the central bank.

That has to be the change in the money supply, minus the change in the central bank's domestic credit.

So if a central bank is losing reserves, it's either because money demand imploded or because they lent too much money.

The central bank printed too much money. When they lend to domestic institutions, whether government or banks or something.

Okay. So we have all these relationships in our head, right?

Now we're going to have fun, huh? So. One important question you might ask yourself is, is the current account deficit declining?

Because, you know, there's a boom in exports and the exporters decided to save the money.

Or is it because there's no finance? Right.

So how would you know if it's because there's so like a boom and exports or something, or because there's just no finance.

So you cannot find the deficit has to go down because there's no way to finance a deficit.

Yeah. Yes. Just a quick question.

So you're saying that there are three different current accounts that I think.

No, no, no. There is only one current accounts. Your three ways of looking at it.

Oh, okay. Three ways of looking at it. They all have to be the same.

They aren't. Yeah. That's the view. I mean, I don't know if you stand to look at the beauty of accounting.

Right. I mean, you would never think of an accountant as an artist, right?

It's like the opposite of an artist. Well, no. But no, the beauty of it is that all three are different ways of describing the same reality.

And so that means they take on the same value at any given point. Absolutely.

They have to be the same. It's the same. Okay. I think in my mind, the canonical one is sort of the external one.

What do you mean by your external one? Uh, Donaldson imports and exports.

Okay, so you'll be surprised. Okay, good.

Good. You'll be surprised. It's not the canonical one. It's just the kind of, like lowbrow.

Okay. So one question would be, is the current count over financed or under financed?

Suppose a country has a has a certain current account deficit.

You know, you might want to know it. Is it is it over finance.

So that gee you know, it could have had a much bigger deficit.

It just did not want to. Or is the current account deficit tight because there's no money to pay for it?

Right. So, um, why can't we see?

So you would say, well, you know, if a current account has trouble being finance, right.

Probably the central bank is losing reserves. Right.

Because it's forced to kind of supply dollars because people are finding dollars.

If it's over finance, maybe the central bank has to go out and intervene in the market and buy dollars.

Or maybe the central bank doesn't have any dollars to sell.

So since it's under finance, there's pressure on the dollars and the exchange rate depreciates.

Or. A maybe the central bank doesn't want to see the, um, the currency depreciate.

Uh, and it doesn't have the dollars. So what would they do?

Say the current account is under finance. There's more demand for dollars than supply of dollars.

The central bank doesn't want to lose its reserves because it doesn't have that many.

It doesn't want to see the exchange rate depreciate. So what will they do?

Your silence makes Jeff Frankel depressed, so.

Hey. I can wait.

Yes, you do have to borrow, huh? You will have to borrow.

Well, from whom? From? We are here for you.

I'm not. That would be a fool. What do central banks to begin with, huh?

Print more money. Print more money? Well, if they print more money, they're going to stoke even more money.

The more dollar demand. People are going to want to use that money to buy dollars in exchange.

And the exchange rate will go. They don't want to let the currency depreciate.

Yes. Restriction on imports. Uh, so they will have to want to restrict imports.

Okay. So that's yeah, that's, um, that's a very dear regime, the totalitarian impulse.

They'll do that. Maybe. But what if they're synchronized? That's, uh, more a ministry of economy policy.

Right? Authorizing imports and so on. It's not a central bank thing.

What would the central bank do? They would raise interest rates, right?

They would raise interest rates. Right? They would rate.

What do central banks do? Right?

They would raise interest rates. Why? Because that means restricting the supply of money.

And they will make up the base for the local currency. More attractive vis-a-vis the dollar.

Right. So they would do like an interest rate defense of the exchange rate.

Right. So what does that means is that when you're under finance, I will observe it as a, as a as as the diagnostician,

I would observe it as either the central bank is losing reserves or the central bank is letting the currency depreciate,

or the central bank is raising interest rates. But some combination of that depending on the exchange rate regime.

Oh, okay. So you see that suddenly prices are going to tell us what the [INAUDIBLE] is happening here.

Okay, good. So so in.

Suppose that you are running a current account deficit and everybody's hunky dory.

Happy. Say you are in August 1998 and suddenly in Russia defaults.

Financial markets get all scared and people stop lending to developing countries, to emerging markets.

We call that a sudden stop? Sudden stop in capital flows.

It's a term that was coined by Rudy Dorn.

Bush was a fantastic economist, a great guy, a professor at MIT, and my kind of mentor and friend in him.

But he called it a southern stop, because there's this famous line that says it is not speed that kills.

It's the sudden stop. So what kills you is not the speed.

It's the sound. Stop. So it's a sense of, you know, you're borrowing happily.

It's a throw, and suddenly, bam! No more borrowing. How would you know that something like that has happened?

So you go. How would you know that if you. If you.

If I give you all the data on the country.

If I give you all the all the data, the monetary accounts, the balance of payments, the fiscal, the GDP, everything, I give you everything.

And you have a pack of numbers and and you want to know OG has a sudden stop happened here?

What data would you look for? Yes, I would think on the current account deficit would go to zero.

Maybe because there's no way to finance the deficit. Okay, so that's one.

But maybe it goes to zero for other reasons. Right.

So there it's like, you know, you have uh, you have a fever, you know, is it Covid?

Well, you know, many things give you a fever, not just Covid.

So what are the things that would you look for? Well, you have trouble borrowing, right?

People don't want to lend money to you. Well, the people who already lend money to you, they own your bonds, right?

That means they probably don't want to hold those bonds. So what will happen to those bonds?

The price of those bonds will fall. The yield on those bonds will go up.

So one thing would be that you would see that country risk has gone up.

Right. And I couldn't observe that right. I would observe improvements in the current account, as you say.

I would observe excess demand for for foreign exchange.

I would observe either a depreciation, either loss of reserves at the central bank or rationing a black market or something.

Right. It will depend on the exchange rate regime.

You'll see excess demand for savings. People are trying to get hold of money and they can't find money.

So interest rates would increase. Um, if the central bank doesn't let the interest rates increase,

it means that the central bank is going to print money to prevent the interest rates from increasing.

But that money that they print is going to want to buy foreign exchange.

So I think that could not worsen the reserve loss or worsen the pressure on the exchange rate.

Right. Okay. And you'll see a collapse in investment and in domestic absorption.

Why? Because people cannot spend because they couldn't borrow. So they have to cut their spending plans.

So that's going to cause a collapse in domestic demand. So in the BBN curve I'm going to be moving to the left.

Right. Okay. And I'll see a collapse in output.

Okay, so here you have a I won't tell you the country, but here is a country running a current account deficit.

Plus a positive number here means a deficit. And these are exports okay.

So they're running a deficit even though exports are are going up.

We're running a larger deficit and suddenly the deficit declines and becomes a surplus.

So they were running a deficit. I don't know who they call this.

$15 billion or so. And suddenly they run a surplus of, I don't know, $10 billion.

You say, oh, why did they go from deficit to surplus? Well, obviously, because their exports went up.

Right. That's what you would have said. The canonical. It must be that the exports went up.

Well, the exports went nowhere. So why the [INAUDIBLE] would the current account improve?

Why would the deficit decline? Well.

This is what happens to a GDP, right?

So GDP declined. The current account was improving because the deficit was falling because GDP was falling falling,

falling falling until it got, you know, a huge crisis -20% okay.

So GDP fell by $55 billion and the current account improved by $20 billion.

That's a typical thing because as you cut spending, only part of your spending goes doubles and the other part goes into non-tradable.

So when you cut spending and the falling GDP tends to exceed the improvement.

And this is what happened to the exchange rate okay.

This was Argentina in the collapse of their peg.

Yeah. Right. So they were they were defending defending defending the current account.

Right. GDP was falling until they couldn't hold anymore and the exchange rate went through the roof.

It tripled. It went from 1 to 3. Okay.

Hey, you didn't see it all through all throughout this period, you did not see any movement in the exchange rate because it was pegged,

but you saw it in a big decline in reserves until the reserves could no longer fall.

Then you saw it in the exchange rate. Okay.

So what's driving the story is the pressure on the exchange rate, but you don't necessarily see it in the price of the dollar because it's bank rate.

Until it isn't. So pressure on the forex can be depreciation reserve loss or rising in interest rates.

So Barry Eichengreen and Charles Whiplash invented this index that you can calculate to kind of average these things.

I believe they. Yeah yeah. So so either you see it in increasing interest rates, either you see an increasing exchange rate or in reserve losses.

Okay. And you should observe an increase in sovereign spreads, an improvement in the current account and so on.

And you could also see it in a black market, say in Argentina.

That's typical. The government wants to control the exchange rate.

They tell you what the exchange rate is. They don't have enough dollars to make that the equilibrium exchange rate.

So you see multiple exchange rates. Okay.

So is access to imports constraining growth while imported raw materials,

intermediate inputs and capital goods are key inputs into a production process.

Um, so very much to be acquired in a sustainable way, you need to pay for exports in the short to run while you generate exports.

You might be able to borrow if they lend to you, but if they don't lend to you, then you are constrained, right?

So your ability to import hence depends on either your exports or your access to finance agents in the economy may not import,

not because they don't want to, but because they can't pay.

So imports might be the constraint on growth. Um, okay.

So. So the question is,

how would you know that there is a if an agents in the economy a don't don't temper because they don't want to or because they can't.

So, for example, I don't know, there might be a recession for other reasons.

Say the government says Covid, you have to stay home or whatever, and you cannot go in buying stuff.

And there's a decline in the demand in the economy. So if I'm not selling, why would I be importing to sell, right.

But on the other hand, it may be that I want to import, but I can't.

So I've given you the whole pack of data from the country.

What piece of information would you look to to disentangle?

Yes. So if you want to import it, you can.

I was saying that there is lack of, uh, for an exchange rate.

Um, if there is, like an exchange rate, like, let's say U.S. dollars.

Um, I respect, um, uh, I like a lot currency.

That is, uh, they were sharing. Um, or maybe the central bank is raising interest rate to defend it.

Defend the currency. So I think that that's those are the things that I'm thinking about, right?

So you would observe pressure on the exchange rate. They can't find the one, but they can.

Or you know, another simple thing that you can do is to take the world Bank enterprise survey and you ask and you see the answers.

What is constraining growth in your in your firm? Is it demand?

Is it access to foreign exchange. And they'll tell you right then if it's demand then, you know I'm not importing because I'm not selling.

So why would I be importing? You know I can't sell what I already have.

So. So it's very important. And for you to get this sense that anything could be happening, as they say, if you have very little data about a country,

there are an enormous amount of possible theories that explains what's happening in the country.

The more data you have on the country, the fewer the theories that are compatible with what's happening.

But you have to have some intuition in your head to how you're going to deploy the information you have access to.

Okay. So let's talk about Sri Lanka. Okay.

So. Again.

We're faced with this. We don't know what the [INAUDIBLE] is happening.

So first thing that's nice to know is that here is a country, um, the trade deficit goes up,

growth goes up, and then the trade deficit improves, no deficit declines and GDP goes to help.

Then the economy kind of like recovers.

The deficit kind of goes back up again in the deficit goes back up again and boom it improves and GDP falls and the deficit goes back up again.

And then GDP also. But then it falls.

So and every time you see one of these peaks in the in the deficit they call in the IMF.

Okay, so it looks like the economy wants to grow. It's trying to grow.

If it to grow it, it needs to import. As it imports, the trade deficit goes up.

As the trade deficit goes up, they run out of foreign exchange. They call the IMF.

The IMF says, oh, you're spending too much. You have to tighten up.

So GDP falls, the trade balance improves, etc.

So, you know, so it appears as the economy is.

Has many things that allow it to grow, accept foreign exchange.

And, you know, they're bumping every three years or so against our balance payments clustering.

That's the hypothesis. You know, many a beautiful theory has been killed by an ugly fact.

So we have to make sure that this is a story. Okay.

So even the IMF programs are a signal that there's a problem.

Okay. SBA, by the way, stands for stand by agreement.

So here these are the countries we decided to compare Sri Lanka to.

They convinced us that we should also include Costa Rica there.

They wanted to be kind of like the Costa Rica of South Asia, which I found a cute.

So what I have here is the rate of growth of GDP.

And in red I have the rate of growth of exports.

You see, for quite a few countries exports grow faster than GDP.

And in general exports tend to grow like 30% faster than GDP.

The elasticity of. Exports to GDP tends to be greater than one.

Except in Sri Lanka where GDP is growing faster than exports.

Okay. So that's kind of like exhibit A it seems to be the economy has the capacity to grow but not to export.

And so as they grow exports don't grow. They hit a constraint.

And this shows in the rate of growth of their imports. So you see their imports are growing like GDP but their exports are not.

And their exports are growing surprisingly slowly.

So I put here all of the countries that they want that we're comparing them to in the region and so on.

I didn't include Vietnam and China because China went from 100 to 2700.

So that's kind of like over there. And Vietnam went from 100 to 12,000.

So that's me. Okay. So so they had the lowest rate of growth of of exports.

And not only that, their exports were a very quote unquote old.

Here we calculated sort of like the vintage of your export basket.

And what year did that product make it into your export basket?

And the redder you are the newer they are in your export basket.

So, um, say in in Costa Rica you have a bunch of the exports were added to in the 90s.

This was, you know, before the 90s.

And you see that for all the other countries there's more novelty in exports that is there more monkeys jumping there, more monkeys jumping.

You have no monkeys that add to your export growth.

And the and you don't have that in Costa Rica.

So in the Netherlands, about 3% of a growth in exports comes from new products.

And you know, in Sri Lanka in the product space was all in the garment sector, very little anywhere else.

And they had this is their. Their probability distribution of how close are your monkeys to other creatures.

And, and um, the um Sri Lanka had, you know, monkeys farther away from, from other trees relative to Malaysia, Thailand than India.

So and, you know,

they had gotten into garments but never moved from garments to electronics or machinery or else or the way we saw in other in other places.

Okay. So that's um, here we are looking at, uh, service exports because maybe you say, okay, you're not very good at goods exports.

And we saw that Singapore was not, you know, Singapore here was not growing too much in goods.

But Singapore is a powerhouse in, in exports there exporting $27,000 per capita.

Okay. $27,000 per capita in service exports.

Yeah. You know, that's why the GDP is $100,000,100,000 per capita.

So. Right.

Um and and Sri Lanka was very small in, in exports except for transport and everything else, even in tourism very little uh service exports.

And in what Sri Lanka was exporting, which was, you know, garments, um, it was competing with India, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Vietnam.

Right. And this is the salaries in or this is the GDP per capita of Sri Lanka relative to that of India, Bangladesh and so on.

So you're competing with countries that are poorer than you, countries that pay lower wages than you.

Right. So you're kind of in, uh,

in a place where you're being out competed because you're the products you're

in are poor country kind of products that pay poor country kind of wages.

And so when you try to grow wages in your country, go up and your export sector cannot afford to pay those wages.

So that was our hypothesis. So we compared, we compared um, a wages in the tradable sector to wages in the non-tradable sector.

So in the tradable sector we took a in garment.

And in the non-tradable sector we took construction. And we found surprisingly is that the garment sector, the export sector pays the lower wages.

Okay. So kind of like the export sector has to higher low has to to survive.

They have to pay these very low wages compared to a non-tradable sector.

So the travel sector for example in Sri Lanka complains there's I don't know, you know what a tuk tuk is right.

So you know, the tradable sector is complaining that workers didn't want to work, that they would rather have no driver tuk tuk.

Well, the tuk tuk is like the non-tradable sector. And if the non-tradable sector offers you a better wage, then you, you quit your job and go.

So. But if they raise the wages, then they lose market share, right?

And we said, okay, we were working at the time in Panama.

So he said, okay. Is it true that always the export sector because of foreign competition based on lower wages?

Um, no. So in, in in Panama, the export sector is the service sector pays much higher wages than either, than, than the non-tradable sector.

So this idea that the tradable sector pays less than the non-tradable sector is not the normality.

I mean, in Chile,

the copper sector probably pays excellent salaries and in raising the salary of copper workers is not going to hurt the exports of Chile.

But raising the salaries of government workers might make them lose, lose their market share.

So we would argue that the problem in Sri Lanka was exports and the problem of exports was complexity.

Okay. So that's our diagnostic of Sri Lanka.

And then we'll ask yourself why are the monkeys not jumping? What's preventing the monkeys to jump, etc., etc.

Okay. So that's story number one by the way.

So suppose that you are here but for some reason maybe foreign competition.

Hey, the curve shifts to the left.

So you, you know, bad news on your export from Cambodia is now taking your market share.

Ethiopia is taking your market share. So the country, uh, wants to keep, uh, full employment, right?

So, I mean, this is the new equilibrium, but that this new equilibrium wages, this increase in competitiveness.

I told you that this is the inverse of wages in dollars has to come from a decline in wages in dollars.

But people might be pissed off at this decline in wages in dollars.

Right. So the government doesn't want to see the decline in wages in dollars.

So we try to, uh, to either stay here.

But a point like this is now a point of deficit. Right.

If they're going to balance the external accounts, they would have to move here.

But they don't want to because that would imply a devaluation of declining dollar wages.

So if they want to protect the wages they move here. But this would be unemployment.

So this is our trilemma again. So anyway so since we left them in Sri Lanka the government lost the election.

Um, and ehm so,

so our story is that Sri Lanka had already been facing cycles of boom and bust that I showed you and all of these standby agreements with the IMF,

right. This was because the economy wanted to pay higher wages.

But given how few monkeys they had and and the nature of the monkeys,

the low complexity nature of the monkeys, they could not compete with other countries.

So they were facing these twin deficits, uh, fiscal deficit and the current account deficit.

The IMF helped Sri Lanka to collect more revenue. So we told them.

Let's. Let's get a new IMF agreement. Let's focus the IMF agreement, not in cutting government spending.

The government was spending very little. Let's use it to increase government revenues.

Let's do a tax reform. Let's increase government revenues. So the government has more resources to to pay and lower its deficit.

But the new government that won the election came in and lower taxes.

And in addition, they had the Easter bombings, you know, terrorist attack.

And they had Covid that hit their tourism sector. So they went to [INAUDIBLE].

So government was a really incompetent government, and they drove the economy to the ground.

So anyway, so that's that's that. Okay.

So that was the story of Sri Lanka. So yeah.

And from the question when. So the cause was that the exports are not diversified.

Right. But what's the cause of that is like uh, government problems that private sector was not I don't know,

is necessarily not like what's the what's the driver of that.

So it and now you need a it's a very good question.

You need a story for that. And that's more than kind of like diagnosing the balance of payments.

So it's not the whole presentation of Sri Lanka. But there are a couple of things.

We found a they had a Bureau of Investment.

So they had they had a policy that said we think that foreign investment is very important.

So because foreign investment is very important, we're going to give cookies to foreign investors okay.

But in order to get those cookies you have to qualify. Because well, I'm not going to give you any money.

So you have to qualify. So the Bureau of Investment was in the business of figuring out if you qualify for the cookies.

So the Bureau of Investment became a bureau not focused on promoting investment, but on authorizing investment.

In addition, the government decided that they wanted to have a monopoly on industrial zones.

They had built some industrial zones. The industrial zones were for they did not make the decision to build more industrial zones.

So there was an artificial constraint on the supply of industrial real estate.

They didn't let the market work. So in addition, ehm, you know,

they had gone through a period of a 28 year civil war that maybe didn't make it kind of like ideal for, for attracting investments.

But we found that more people were trying to get in and actually we had the list of all the applications of to foreign investment.

So working with my Andrew's, we did a major reform of their Bureau of Investments.

We found out that essentially the Bureau of Investment, they had about 1500 people, from which about five were doing investment promotion.

So we thought maybe we should invert it. Yeah. So we trained them on monkeys and trees.

We. We trained their. We transform their.

Their economic attachés into investment promotion agents.

We train them to do investment promotion and so on. So so that was our our approach.

We worked with the Tourism Development Board,

with the Export Development Board and with the investment board to say, okay, and let's let's do high bandwidth.

Let's figure out through that interaction what the [INAUDIBLE] is constraining this stuff.

And anyway, so that's that's that. Now, this story here in Saudi Arabia is um, is an interesting story again.

So we don't know where the [INAUDIBLE] the problem is. But in 2014, the price of oil declined.

You know, Saudi Arabia, as you can imagine, I don't know if we have, though the price of oil declined.

And this is a government current expenditures and this is government capital expenditure.

Suddenly the price of oil declined. They are spending this oil revenues are uh, are now much, much lower.

But spending can no longer sustain these levels.

Uh this is game increases to this is the change in government, uh, deposits in the Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority.

That's their central bank.

So because the price of oil was high, they were accumulating reserves and suddenly the price of oil collapses and they're losing reserves.

Okay, so this change in reserves has something to do with the difference between how many dollars they're making.

So how many dollars you're making and how much you're spending.

Okay. So these differences get accumulated in international reserves.

And because they were making so much money, they were paying back their debt.

But suddenly the price declines and suddenly they start borrowing again.

Okay.

And this is very interestingly, ehm, the difference between the actual price of oil and something that we call the fiscal break even price of oil,

which is the price of oil at which they would not have had a deficit.

Okay, so you can think of it. The break even price of oil is to say I am spending as if the price of oil was this.

Okay. So when the price of oil was 94, they were spending as if it was 43.

When the price of oil was 106, they were spending as if it was 80.

And so now that the price of oil is 41, they are spending as if it was 74.

Okay. So this sounds like to be, you know, part of the story.

This is your canonical thing, right? But it's an interesting it's not really your canonical thing because you would say

the current account deficit is equal to the fiscal deficit plus the private surplus.

Okay. So that is you have a current account deficit because either the private sector is spending more money than they're making,

or the government is spending more money than they're making. So here the government is spending more money than they are making.

If the private sector does not compensate by saving more money, then it will show up in the current year.

And so the government suddenly decided, gee, I'm spending 103.

I'm spending no, I'm spending 89. I'm spending here 103.

Look at their bad luck. They decided to go on a spending spree and suddenly the price of oil collapses.

So they start cutting spending. They're cutting spending, but revenue declines much more.

So they have to kind of stabilize this. We're going to talk about a point stabilization next week.

And so this is a very interesting and graph.

We told them look this is the way your economy works.

This is Salma is the monetary authority and this is Aramco is their oil company.

Okay. This is the rest of the world. This is the government.

And this is, say, the non-oil economy. How does the Saudi economy work?

Aramco sends oil to the rest of the world and the rest of the world sends dollars, right?

Aramco goes to the monetary authority with these dollars and they ask for riyals.

Aramco bases riyals to the government.

The government spends this money in.

In the non-oil economy, the non-oil economy takes these regions and by dollars at the central bank,

and they send those dollars abroad in exchange for imports.

Okay, so if you want to think of what drives the non-oil economy, just look into this box here.

Demand pressures are coming because the government spends money.

And since you know that spending is a combination of tradable and non-tradable and everything requires imported inputs,

no, this non-oil economy is going to demand some dollars that they're going to take out.

So. The non-oil economy is going to see government spending as a source of demand.

That's going to, in some sense, generate output, and they just buy the dollars that they need.

So that's exactly what we saw. This is net government spending.

This is a part of government spending spend. I mean financed by oil.

And this is a non-oil GDP.

So non-oil GDP is essentially just driven by government spending.

If you tell me government spending the R-square is 0.92.

Tell me your government spending. I'll tell you what the GDP is. Okay. By the way, you have an open labor market, so the price of oil goes up.

1 million people come in, right? So you don't run out of people.

But suddenly they are going to cut spending.

So if they're going to cut spending, it's not going to be good for GDP growth.

So we see that as they cut spending, these cuts in spending, those are these cuts in spending.

A GDP no longer grows right. And it starts declining.

So in addition oil cannot be the long run driver of the economy.

These are oil exports in barrels per capita.

So you might not have known but oil exports per capita peaked in 1992.

And Saudi Arabia and have been on a downward trend since.

So if you're thinking, okay, what's going to make the economy grow? Well, oil well volumes are not growing.

So you need prices to compensate. So if you want to increase imports, you want to increase spending imports, you know,

prices would have to compensate the fact that quantities are declining in per capita terms.

In addition. A I'm going to compare what happens in periods of fiscal expansion.

Like there was a big fiscal expansion between 2011 and 2014.

Spending went from the equivalent of spending as if it was at $80, to spending as if it was at 103.

Okay, so spending this is a period of of of spending increases.

In the period in 1986, 82, 86, the price of oil collapsed.

Exports declined. So this is a period of fiscal contraction.

And the question is how does the economy respond in periods of boom, a fiscal boom and fiscal program and periods of fiscal boom?

This is what happened to non-oil GDP.

It went up in this in this three year period.

Essentially, because Non-tradable went up tradable, it's barely budged in periods of fiscal contraction non-tradable decline.

Because if you're cutting demand, you know, and if the economy's going to grow at all, it's going to grow because trade is expanding.

Okay. So it says if you're going to go to a period in which the government cannot spend as much money,

m if you're going to see growth, it's because other deals will have to increase.

Non-tradable are likely going to decline because the government is spending less money.

Yes. Um, one question on the oil prices.

Isn't it somewhat endogenous because Saudi Arabia can control the price of oil or has some influence on the price of oil because of OPEC?

So they're not just a price taker. They have some influence over it.

Right? Yes, yes. However, either way they influence the price is by cutting quantity.

And what matters is p times q. So they they might have some influence in price but but by sacrificing quantity so they get hit anyway.

Actually what happened in 82, 86, 85 is that they kept they kept the price high.

But the only way they could they have to cut volumes to keep the price high.

So they went from producing 10 million barrels of oil to producing 3 million barrels of oil to keep the price of 26.

And when they got to 3 million barrels of oil, they said, no, no, no, no, no,

I'm not going to be cutting my supply so that everybody else can sell their oil at a high price.

So they went, you know what? I'm going back to 10 million. And that caused the price to go from 26 to 8.

And by the way, if you want to know with a price at eight, that is what caused the collapse of the Soviet Union.

So the Soviet Union collapsed because of oil. And anyway, so and so essentially the economy, when the price of oil was high, say, before 2014,

was kind of like here, this is the curve, this is the curve, this is the FD zero curve okay.

This is a delta a equals zero. This is where the private sector is in balance.

The private sector is in balance. There is full employment. This is the equilibrium point of the economy.

It's an equilibrium point with a government fiscal surplus compensated by a balance of payments surplus.

They can do that forever. Accumulate reserves?

No problem. They can stay there forever. Government is saving money abroad.

Equal to that is the current account surplus. Everything is hunky dory.

Suddenly the price of oil declines.

That means that the b b curve moves to the left. The delta equals zero curve has to cross over here okay.

And now the new equilibrium point is where Delta A crosses the curve.

That's here. Now the only problem is that now this is a point of deficit.

Okay. You can stay there spend as if in a before before this point is above the curve.

So it's a point of surplus. Now it's below the b b curve.

The new b b curve. It's a point of deficit. So if you stay there forever you're gonna lose all your reserves.

And eventually you'll get into trouble. If you have a lot of savings, maybe you can stay there a long time.

By the way, I checked yesterday the price of oil was at 72, and I checked what was the breakeven price of oil in Saudi Arabia now?

What do you think it is? You know.

Uh huh. You know. 122.

Okay. They are spending $40 more per barrel, and they're actually making that difference is what pays for Cristiano Ronaldo.

Sure. For Neom, for whatever.

So this is, you know, there's this perception that Saudi Arabia is this booming place.

It's a borrowing boom. This is um.

By the way. Anyway, so. Okay. They're going to go to [INAUDIBLE].

So. Yeah. I'm. You're right.

Because the only thing they can do now is cut spending massively.

And them. And if they don't, they're going.

They're right now borrowing as if it was going out of fashion, selling their assets.

Um, and you know, and, and Cristiano Ronaldo will get old.

It's not that, you know, it's a radio and they own an asset.

No. Yeah. It's a borrowing theme.

Or they're spending their savings and increasing their boats.

But but mostly borrowing boom now. Yeah.

And also selling assets. Selling. But their assets I mean they want to sell the chemical company.

They are selling the oil companies.

Uh, so, you know, and the guys who are buying it, if you're not stupid, they are expecting to get a good return on that investment.

But they know that the government might tax them in the future, expropriate them in the future.

So they're probably discounting it at a higher interest rate than the interest rate that the government would discount the future on.

So I think they're losing money when they sell assets. But that's a different story.

So so we did this back of the envelope calculation.

What would need to happen for tradable for non-oil tradable to compensate for their growth plan.

So we say look at the forecast population is that they'll have 40 million people by 2030.

Let's assume that oil production grows by 2% per year.

That's not what's been happening. It's been stable or falling.

Let's assume that domestic consumption goes up with GDP so that the elasticity of energy is one.

Let's assume that the international price of oil, um, means that $60 by 2020 and $70 by 2030 at 2015 prices.

Okay. We're doing the calculation 2015. Let's assume that imports of goods and services fall from 34% to 30% in 2020 and 20, and 25% in 2030.

There's going to be import substitution. Okay. So let's assume that there's some import substitution.

And this these are all optimistic assumptions okay.

And if we want GDP to grow at 4% GDP per capita to grow at 4% in this period, which was kind of like their target.

What will non-oil exports need to do to pay for this. Okay.

So this is the calculation. This is what this was 2012.

This is by 2015. That's the population this GDP per capita.

This is the import coefficient. So these are the imports.

Okay. So it's a simple back of the envelope calculation using these assumptions.

So these are the oil exports per capita given these assumptions.

So this would have to be the non-oil exports and per capita.

Okay. And this is the total non-oil exports.

So from 2015 levels they would have to grow by 370%.

Okay. So it means that for it to compensate for this decline in in the price of oil exports would have to be growing by leaps and bounds.

So we say, okay, what exports could grow by leaps and bounds.

And we found out, you know, hey something about their complexity and so on.

In this period we looked at this is the stock exchange data from their stock exchange.

These are the profits. What's happened to the gross profits of the different industries in Saudi Arabia?

You would expect that if there's going to be a boom in tradable, it's because trade are very profitable.

So it makes sense to invest in trade levels to to start building of that tradable sector.

Right. And what we found is that everything tradable had negative returns.

So non-tradable. You know pharma, I don't know. We're relatively profitable, but the more tradable sectors, we're losing profitability.

So now what's going to grow here?

You know this is where they are in the product space.

Doesn't look like very sexy things. This is the economic complexity index.

And this is the minimum wage. And for their level of complexity the minimum wage is super high.

You would say well they're going to start diversifying into other things.

But the other things they would diversify into would be low complexity products.

And these low complexity products are probably competing with countries that have a much lower GDP per capita and that are paying much lower wages.

So for them, they're kind of like in a complicated situation, they cannot they've gotten rich on the basis of oil, and now they want to diversify.

But it's hard. So that's the story for solving.

Okay. So you see you have your framework in your head.

You're asking yourself a question. What's the story here? The story here is is oil revenues and fiscal spending.

And if oil revenues are not going to grow, the economy is not poised for growth because it's the only game in town.

And if it doesn't grow, volumes per capita are declining if the price does not compensate.

So that's that's Saudi. So Ethiopia is an interesting case.

Ethiopia is a country. This is GDP per capita. It was stagnant in this period around here.

And you know this song we are the world. We are.

Well that's because there was a famine in Ethiopia here. Okay.

So stagnant GDP per capita and suddenly boom, the economy starts to grow like crazy.

10% per year. Super cool.

Okay. And poverty rates start to decline. This is extreme poverty.

This is a national poverty line. So everything is looking fine.

If you look at annualized, ehm, growth rates, you know, they start growing at 11% or 10%, that 8%.

And now they're growing more slowly. So the economy has been slowing down.

And this is the employment rate. It grew a lot etc.

But now it's been slowing down. So why is it slowing down.

So these are the contributions to real GDP. It started with a lot of growth in agriculture growth.

A little bit of growth in manufacturing the red things and a lot of growth in services.

So. So initially in the boom there was a contribution from agriculture increasingly services and then some manufacturing okay.

He started to make I mean this services include Ethiopian Airlines which is now the most successful airline in sub-Saharan Africa.

They beat the South Africans and they managed it well.

They have these big investments in dams. This is a grand Renaissance Dam Gerd.

They call it Grand something Renaissance dam.

ALM so they'll become eventually exporters of electricity.

And so, so so they were investing this much of GDP.

They increased to this much. They expanded to that much.

But in spite of this increasing investment the growth rate was declining.

Interest Finlay imports as a share of GDP were also declining.

So we asked ourselves the question are imports a problem? Why are imports as a share of GDP declining?

So this is what was happening to imports. So you see that that's where imports were going.

But in reality they didn't go there. So our question was is this lack of import growth?

Is is that what's slowing down the economy? Okay.

So let's look at how they paid for those imports. Well here they started to pay for those imports with eight.

Eight is the great part and with exports.

But as it moved on a they started to borrow money.

All this red thing is borrowed money started to borrow from the Chinese.

Okay. And suddenly here they people start saying you've borrowed too much.

No more borrowing. So borrowing starts coming down.

And essentially this decline in relative to expected import growth is due mainly to this declining borrowing.

We could no longer sustain borrowing. So this looks like a bit of a southern stop.

Okay. That's the. Okay.

So. This is a in.

Okay. So everything in this period everything grew much more slowly.

This is, uh, what is this FDI? So FDI increased, but remittances declined.

FDI, I mean, external debt, which was this component here became negative.

So you now you start paying back, okay. As a consequence.

So. The government could no longer fund its deficit.

This is a a a this is this is foreign borrowing and this is domestic borrowing.

So the government was borrowing 5.6% of GDP from abroad.

It went to 1%. They stopped borrowing from abroad and they try to compensate by borrowing more domestically.

But borrowing more domestically means kind of printing money. So that's going to generate a problem.

So the idea is they couldn't borrow so they couldn't import.

Well okay. So you would expect that they are not importing because they can't afford to.

So I should observe constraints. So the exchange rate depreciates.

This is the official exchange rate. And this is the black market rate. And the difference between the two widens.

Okay. So as a rising black market premium okay.

And this is um. What the [INAUDIBLE] is this?

This is another exchange. An all black market. This, uh, this is the black market premium.

The black market premium goes to 3,040% is the difference between between the two.

So we observe a high shadow price changes and changes.

We observe that as a growth slowed you also see imports declining.

Import intensive firms were shutting down. We found that from the enterprise survey of the world Bank.

And companies were trying to bypass the constraint. So um, many a lot of evidence of of companies arm in a, you know,

going to Dubai to buy stuff in Dubai so that they couldn't they don't have to import it in the country officially,

but put it in their, in their luggage and so on.

So. So our argument is that Ethiopia stopped growing because they could not generate the foreign exchange and they could not borrow.

And that's why the economy was slowing down, that because the government was having these big investment programs and could not fund them.

They were printing the money because they were printing the money that was creating pressure on the exchange rate,

pressure on inflation, pressure on the black market. Premium companies could not expand their output because they could not get imports,

and they could not get imports because they could not get foreign exchange. So that's the story in in Ethiopia.

Okay. So we have five minutes for discussion.

Yes. Uh, so in terms of actually doing all of this analysis is like, what's the process like?

Is it? Is it if you only rely on data or are you also guided by interviews and discussions which point you towards where to look?

That's a very good question. If you have the opportunity to talk to people, it's very useful so long as you know what to ask.

So, for example, if you want to know, um, a.

Ay ay ay. You know, if you have a conversation with people, you are essentially testing hypotheses you have in your head.

So, for example, if your hypothesis was I think the problem in this country is lack of finance.

You would go and say, look, suppose I have $20 million to invest in your country.

Where would I put it? And then suddenly you lift on people's.

You say, oh, I no longer have an investment finance constraint.

What would I do if I didn't have a finance constraint? And there you are expecting people to say, oh, I would put it in here and there,

etc., because there's good demand etcetera, but people haven't been able to invest.

Right. If um.

Um, you know, in the enterprise survey,

the top problem that firms were reporting was as the main constraint for increasing output was the access to foreign exchange.

So we went to a couple of companies and ask them, hey, why are you not producing more or whatever?

You say, well, this was a print or it couldn't get ink. So the guy would go to Dubai to buy ink in Dubai and bring in his luggage.

So, um, and why there is a queue?

There is a queue, um, to get foreign exchange.

So there is, um. A priority list and a normal list.

The priority list. You have to wait nine months. The regular list, you wouldn't get any, so you would have to buy it in the black market.

And if, for example, Im in Ethiopia is a coffee exporter.

So importers were buy coffee from growers, pretend to be exporters so they could retain some of the dollars that they exported.

Right. So there was all sorts of things and, you know, a lot of evidence that this was a constraint, by the way,

in a the government recently, uh, we developed very good relations with a guy with two Kennedy School graduates.

One was the advisor to a central bank, was working.

He is working for the IMF. He was seconded to Ethiopia.

And the other one was a an MPP that graduated um and and he was the, an economic advisor to the prime minister.

This guy from the IMF went back to the IMF. This guy from the Prime Minister's office became the new governor of the eye of the central bank.

And last July, they announced a package of unifying the exchange rate, liberalizing the import controls,

getting an IMF funding and so on, which we had been very involved, kind of like conceptually earlier on.

So you were going to see if if he gets to to to talk to you in sometime later in the course, if he has the time.

So, so if a country, ehm has a balance of payments uh or capital account that are constrained, it will not be able to buy imports.

The inability to import makes it difficult to diversify and to export.

So you get this thing that you don't export because you can't import and you don't import because you can't export.

So you can get into this bad equilibrium.

If you suddenly lift this constraint, then exporters can get foreign exchange, they can import and they can export there.

So so there might be multiple equilibria. That's part of the idea with this IMF program.

But let's let's lift the foreign exchange constraint.

Let's allocate foreign exchange more efficiently by using more market means.

And let's see if that's enough to generate a supply response that will make it sustainable.

That's actually what happened. That's my interpretation at least of what happened with the Marshall Plan.

No, it's a very interesting this the story of the Marshall Plan was that the US helped win the Second World War in 1945.

They said, we want we give you your freedom.

We are going back between 1945 and 1948, the economy of Europe did horribly but horribly.

You had hyperinflation in Germany. You had everything that was going in the wrong direction.

They thought your end of story. No, no more war.

The economy should recover. It didn't recover. A at the same time Russia was the Soviet Union was acting more forcefully.

And they and people saying, well, capitalism doesn't work, look at what's happening.

It's a disaster. So George Marshall decided something had to be done.

And in a speech at Harvard, he announced the Marshall Plan.

A And the Marshall Plan worked marvelously well.

And you say, but how the [INAUDIBLE] I mean and inspired creating the world Bank and so on.

So because the Marshall Plan worked so well, and you wonder,

why did the Marshall Plan work so well and and the world Bank hasn't worked so well as the Marshall Plan.

My interpretation is that the problem is after the Second World War is that countries needed to import and there was a dollar shortage,

and because they couldn't import, they couldn't export, and because they couldn't export, they couldn't import.

Okay. So suddenly in comes the Marshall Plan, at least temporarily, the constraint on foreign exchange.

So now they can import. And because they can import, they can export, they can export, they can import them.

And the story.

