[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
That's. They.

Have not. Um.

You so. Is.

I'm sorry. If I ask that question.

I mean, was. Sorry.

Oh. Okay.

Okay. Honest. Let's get going.

So today we are going to talk about volatility.

And next lecture we're going to start talking about a.

Fiscal policy that is a cause of volatility. But before we get there let's do some housekeeping.

Problem set four is due tomorrow. Problem set five which is the last one.

It's on macro diagnostics and it's due November 26th.

Um final presentations are December 9th and 10th.

Um. So, uh, you know, avail yourself of office hours if you need support, especially on the macro side.

And so this is what I'm going to say very quickly.

I'm going to say that volatility is big. That volatility is bad for things we care about.

I'm going to show you why in a certain um benchmark model.

Volatility shouldn't matter. So if we do find that it matters what's wrong with that model.

And um and then I'm going to go into describing why volatility in the terms of trade or volatility in,

in real exports, uh, might, might become problematic for an economy and what to do about it.

So that's what we plan to do today. So so what is volatility.

Can somebody help me define it.

I would say when something changed a lot with something like a lot of bodies around here, meaning unathletic dispersion.

Uh. Sorry, kid. Huh? Maybe. Uh huh. So it changes a lot, but it changes a lot.

Not necessarily in a predictable way. Right. So it's something that it's unstable, but it's unstable enough in a somewhat unpredictable way.

There are different ways of measuring volatility. Um, and one way of measuring volatility is by looking at the level of a variable.

And is it going up or down. Another one is by looking at the rate of change of a variable.

So do you look at levels or do you look at rates of change.

Um, do you look at actual changes or do you look at the unexpected component of the change?

So there might be some part of the change that was anticipated, another part that was not.

And then there are many kinds of, um, metrics of dispersion that you might want to consider.

You might want to look at the standard deviation and then apply that to the level or the standard deviation.

And you apply that to the rate of change, or maybe the standard deviation of an equation or of the deviations from a trend.

Say you, you um, you estimate of trend can be a linear trend can be an autoregressive trend.

It can be a filter Kalman filter or something.

Right. And then you look at the deviations from that filter, or you estimate an equation and you look at the standard error of the equation.

Okay. Or other dimensions of deviation.

Most of the time we just take the standard deviation either of the level of the rate of change.

And. So.

Um, let me highlight the difference between taking the standard deviation of the level and taking the standard deviation of the rate of change.

This is the growth, uh, of GDP in China.

This is the level of GDP measured here.

And this is the rate of change of GDP measured here. It's the same data.

What should you take the standard deviation on?

Remind you, the standard deviation takes the mean and then takes the distance from each observation to the mean,

squares them, and then takes the square root. Okay.

By squaring them, you eliminate them negatives and the positive.

They all become positive, right? So what would happen if you take the standard deviation of the level?

Well, you know, you take the mean. The mean is around here, right?

So this is very far from the mean. That's very far from the mean.

So you're going to get a very big standard deviation. What is that big standard deviation capturing.

Well it's capturing. Yes. Capturing?

How much? Exactly. Just.

It's capturing growth. And I don't want to call growth volatility.

Right? Right. So if you take the standard if you take the rate of change okay.

If you take the rate of growth of GDP and now you take the standard deviation, what is the mean of that.

What is the mean of this. Well the mean of this is average growth.

So you are taking the deviations vis-a-vis the average growth.

And that sounds more like volatility. Right. So you would never take the standard deviation of the level of GDP.

Never. Right. Never.

Um, but the standard deviation of the rate of change is more meaningful because it's how much does growth differ from the average growth.

Okay. Okay. So when you take measures of volatility, say, of the rate of growth of GDP, of the rate of growth, of consumption,

of the rate of growth over year, exchange rate, etc., you find that industrialized countries typically tend to have lower volatilities.

So for example this is GDP in the US.

This is GDP in Venezuela. So in the U.S. you see a GDP has a trend.

It has some wiggles around the trend. In Venezuela you don't see a trend.

You just see wiggles. So it's kind of you know.

Right. Good. So this is the volatility of the rate of growth of GDP across regions of the world.

And that tells you that this is a variable that changes significantly by level of income and by region.

Okay. So we. And not every so and this is the industrialized countries.

This is Latin America. This is sub-Saharan Africa.

And no no no no that's not right.

This is industrialized countries. This is in Latin America.

This is sub-Saharan Africa. This is East Asia.

This is Mena and this is South Asia.

So in general, you find that, you know, Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa are competing for the privilege of being the most, um, volatile.

Right? And here you have, uh, here are sub-Saharan Africa.

That's. Yeah. This is May, not this is sub-Saharan Africa. This is mano a mano.

Okay. So anyway, so in addition, uh, you know, we care about volatility when not only because sometimes times are really,

really good, but because sometimes times are really, really bad.

Right? So you might want to care about the left hand tail of the distribution where things are bad.

And I think I already presented some of this data in a previous lecture.

Is that right? And uh something these.

Shopping days if you miss them. So?

So I take a series and I put a filter and the filter is going to start a clock.

If for example, GDP falls. So I start a clock and then the clock is going to go on until GDP returns to its original level.

Then I stop the clock and I measure the result of a crisis.

Then I look at the minimum in this period, and I take this number and this number calculate the fall or the peak to trough.

Okay. We call that the depth of the crisis. And then I can calculate this area under the curve.

Right. Which is sort of like the lost GDP during the crisis. And I can do that right.

And once I've defined the filter I can just look around them.

So this is the biggest recession in the US in the postwar period until Covid.

All right. So this is our global financial crisis. It's a traumatic event in U.S. history.

Um hmm. It lasted three years.

GDP fell by 3.1% and the area under the curve was 4%.

That gives you that's kind of like big.

Okay. This is the same story for Spain.

GB fell by almost 9%. It took nine years to get back in.

The area under the curve was ten times bigger, 41% and not 4%.

In Greece it fell 27%.

Nine times more. Nine times more.

And you know, duration is question mark because we are not there yet.

No. So these are some of the largest crises in in history.

Some of them have to do with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of communism, in the case of Albania.

So GDP peak to trough is not 4 or 29 is, you know, 78%, 70%, 60%, etc. in other cases, it's associated with civil wars.

This was a civil war. This was a war. That was a war.

This was a civil war. This was a war.

This was a war. This was a war. So you conclude that wars are not terribly good for GDP.

Right. So. And these are small, uh, and diversified islands in the middle of, of the Pacific.

So this is, for example, the case of Zimbabwe. GDP fell by 50% and the area under the curve was about 400% of GDP.

That's four years of GDP. Um, okay.

So so crises tend to be bigger in developing countries.

Or for example, the global financial crisis was supposedly global.

It was financial crisis. A you wouldn't expect by the name that countries that are more financial would be hurt more.

So who's financial? Well, you know, the U.S. is a big financial center.

Switzerland is a big financial center. Their GDP fell by less than 3%.

Area under the curve was less than four four in the U.S., less than four in Switzerland.

But it was humongous in Greece and it was humongous in Latvia and so on.

So there's no there's something.

So you can imagine that if you take a tennis ball and a ceramic vase, okay, and you throw the tennis ball against the ground, what's going to happen?

It's it's going to bounce back. Right. If you throw the ceramic vase into the ground, what's going to happen?

It's going to shatter, right? So the question is not so much how hard you hit it, but what happens to it when you hit it, right?

And this is suggestive that something happens to different economies when you hit them,

that once some of them just bounce back and nothing terrible happens.

Others really get into trouble. Yes. Um, sometimes I've seen they look at a crisis based on the kind of pre-trump growth.

Yeah. And when it becomes that, is there a time we should think of a crisis in that way compared to this way, or is just a different measure?

Well, I mean. If you put a trend you could have done, I could have done this here.

Um, I could have put a trend, but that would have made all the crisis look that much bigger.

And most of them would never have, because you never go back to the pre-trained levels or very often,

you know, there is a permanent component to a crisis. So this was just to make the numbers less dramatic or up.

Yeah. Okay. But for the US you might be able to. Yeah 2%.

And by the way, the US is above its pre-COVID trend right.

Most countries around the world are not they're not that their pre Covid trend.

There's uh there's an interesting publication which is uh.

Uh, and I call it the, um, well, the World Economic Outlook from the IMF.

And it's interesting. Because it's published twice a year.

And they publish five year projections going forward.

So I'm always I always have fun. And I've done many presentations where I show the IMF projections and what happened afterwards.

And, and the errors made by the IMF are not mean zero and eight.

They make systematic errors in their projections and which is uh, is interesting.

Anyway.

Um, so so the next thing I want to say is that the real exchange rate, which is a variable we discussed last week, it's it's a vertical variable.

In the Rbnz model, the real exchange rate is a very important a price.

It's much more volatile in developing countries than in industrialized countries.

So this here you have the measures of real exchange rate volatility for some 50 countries.

Ehm, where we calculated ehm real exchange rate volatility in five year horizons so as to eliminate

any kind of like short term monetary noise and just take the volatility of a more structured,

you know, five year, you know that let me maybe take a minute to say a typically there are two kinds

of time series one time of time series that is called stationary or maybe

stationary around the trend and stationary series would have this feature that x t is equal to some x bar plus some error term and maybe some trend.

Okay, but it's kind of like there's uh, you're sampling from a distribution that has a known mean.

This is called stationary. This one is called what?

Huh? Say, yeah. Say, say. Pick up a random walk.

Correct. Good. If you're. If you're right, you should yell.

Okay. Okay. So why?

Because a random walk means that since this, the expected value of the error is zero, right?

It means that your best guess of the future is the past. That supposedly all information about the future is already here, right?

So if you think of the real exchange rate as stationery, right?

If you measure a big distance from x x bar, the next observation might be x bar or below x bar maybe.

Whatever. Right.

But if you have a stationary a random walk, a if you're very far from whatever X bar you had measured, you know you're not going back.

You don't know that you're going back. You know, because the last observation is your best guess of the future.

Random walks. Have a variance that grows with the square root of time.

Stationary. The variance is not supposed to grow. It's always associated with the standard deviation of epsilon.

Okay. So, um, when you take if you have a series of the real exchange rate,

if you take monthly the monthly variation or the quarterly variation or the yearly variation,

you would expect that the yearly variation is bigger than the quarterly variation,

that the quarterly variation is bigger than monthly variation by construction.

Okay. And they should be related to the square root of time.

So we took this five year horizons precisely to kind of smooth out any kind of short term fluctuations.

And if we colored in yellow kind of industrialized countries and we colored in blue kind of developing countries or um,

lower income, you know, non not rich countries.

Okay. And if you apply this technique you probably studied with Dan Levy called eyeball econometrics.

You kind of see that the blues are on the right and the left are the yellows are on the left.

Would be that kind of like statistically significant?

Looks like that. Okay. Um, even, you know.

It's a I painted Taiwan blue and Israel blue.

You might say, well, these are pretty rich places now. Uh, I painted the Bahamas blue.

You might ask, is that really a country? You know?

And I painted Portugal yellow. Maybe you'd say, you know, Portugal should not.

It's not all that yellow, you know. So, uh, so, but, um, so there's a lot of volatility in the real exchange rate.

Now it's going to come in the next session when I, when I develop um, a some implications.

Volatility is bad. M.

M. It's a I'm going to argue. It's bad for growth.

It's bad for inequality. It's bad for poverty. It's bad for educational attainment.

Okay. What is it? A national holiday tree.

And Chile is always a national danger.

Good, good. So volatility is going to matter whenever you have a variable that is volatile here and

a variable that you care about here where the relationship between the two is concave.

Why is that. Why is I'm going I'm stating that there must be a theorem that says that if the relationship is concave, then volatility is bad.

If the relationship would be convex, then volatility would be good.

I went, if you were a mathematician, how would you go about prove that theorem?

But here. Miguel.

Um, it's the same as when we say that when you change our discoveries,

because the expected utility of their outcome is less than the utility of the expected outcome.

Good. And why? Why so?

So you repeat that kind of like the theorem. But give me an intuition for why does it work.

And I would prefer the the average of the or the things only better than the I

mean the good side bad because the bad hurts me when I'm overdue the average,

I mean. Because what you want to say is that the bad becomes steeper, right?

And the good is better.

Man in trouble. It's getting good at a decreasing rate.

So if this variable has a certain volatility, my expected value is this.

But because these things are falling faster than these things are growing,

when you take the average of this variable is going to be this number instead of this number.

So you would want to trade the expected value rather than the outcomes.

Right. And that's because the average of this variable is this.

If I had had the average I would have gotten this.

But because I have a distribution of things that here the bad things are bad are worse and the good things are good.

Because. Because this slope is growing in this direction.

These things are relatively bad compared to how these things are good.

And that is what gives you risk aversion. So risk aversion means that you would prefer the risk less outcome than than the risky outcome.

Had it been the other way around then the good outcomes are better than the bad ones.

You'll take the bad outcomes in exchange for the good outcomes.

Okay. Is that clear? Good.

Clear. You look confused. Yeah. You think too, huh?

Imagine the curve being like that. Then as I vva to the bad outcomes, I don't get particularly bad.

But as I get to good outcomes becomes really good. Then you become a risk lover.

Okay. Good. Very good.

So this was my. My if my first flagship report as a young chief economist of the Inter-American development Bank, my first report was on volatility.

And this was figure one of that report, where here we had the standard deviation of GDP as a measure of volatility.

And here the average rate of growth. And we divided the world into quartiles of volatility.

So we took the most volatile the next most volatile and so on.

And we calculated the average GDP growth of that quartile okay.

And we found this relationship here right. That the most volatile we're growing less the least volatile we're growing more.

And then on top of that we took the industrial economy's average and the Latin American average, which were sort of like on the same line.

So the argument of the report was the reason why Latin America was not making more progress is not that he didn't have some good years,

is that it had some good years mixed with not not so good year.

So the average becomes relatively mediocre okay.

So volatility is bad for growth. Volatility we argued was also bad for income inequality.

And the idea is more or less the same one as this. If there's a volatile outcome.

In. Maybe the rich can cope.

But for the poor it may be harder to cope. Like for example.

A shock to the income of a rich family is unlikely to force that family to.

Get their kids out of school. But you can perfectly imagine that there will be an adjustment factor in a poor family.

Right. So you have these discontinuous events, right? So it's going to be bad for educational progress.

So there's a lot of evidence that shocks pick kids out of school.

And and when the shock subsides, kids don't go back to school.

Or if they go back to school, they there's no substitution for the lost time and so on.

Yes. Really? I'm curious if there are countries that are too small to fail, like mostly farming or something like that,

but they're just not as impacted by global too small to fail.

Yeah. I mean, there is a book called Too Small to Fail, which was written by a Swiss.

Oh, I think Switzerland is just one too.

Well, I mean, I showed you that the Mariana Islands Tuvalu Crevasse are very, very volatile and very unstable, and they have very bad crises.

And there are adjustment factors that people just leave. So.

So it's too small to fail.

I think they're probably example. I mean, the argument of, of the book on Switzerland and other countries like Costa Rica and so on,

is that because they're relatively small, maybe an aim homogeneous or something, they can have an easier time agreeing on things.

Um, than some countries might have. There are too diverse or something about other things sense of us, you know, in other dimensions.

But a priori, if there's a hurricane in the US, the hurricane is somewhere in the US, but most of the US is unaffected.

So most of your tax base is still intact.

So it's credible that the federal government is going to bail out the states that get hit by a hurricane, and they're just as clear a disaster area.

And and, you know, the rest of a country pays if you are a small place and you get a hurricane, the tax base is gone.

So there's no one to insure you against the bad joke. So I can imagine things going in both directions.

Thank you. So, you know the old joke that says that people know that things work out in theory and they wonder if they work in practice.

But then economists know that things work out in practice, and they wonder if they work in theory.

Right? So so we know intuitively that volatility is bad.

But what do you need to put in a model to make volatility bad.

Because in the canonical model say the arrow the brain model volatility would not be bad.

Now have you seen anything related to the arrow Debra.

Anybody ever heard here about either Arrow or Debra.

Arrow theorems. Arrow. Impossibility theorem.

Uh huh. This one has nothing to do with that.

But go ahead. There's another arrow theorems for electronic collection.

Yeah. Yeah, that you cannot.

That the in what if in a collective made out of rational people, a axioms of rationality are not going to be true about the aggregate?

But. We may discuss that in a future lecture next week.

But this is different. The arrow debris model is a model of general equilibrium that assumes that markets are complete.

And what's nice, by the way, anybody know any relationship between an arrow and some other economist?

So Kenneth Arrow won the Nobel Prize?

Deservedly so. Was, uh, the uncle of Larry Summers, as well as Paul Samuelson, the uncle of Larry Summers.

Um, Larry Summers. His father, called Robert Summers, was also a famous economist.

Um, so in Larry Summers learned economics with, um, baby milk.

So in this model, markets are complete.

But they they have to they specify a complete market means that there's full markets for anything you might want today,

but there's also future markets. So there's a market today for say umbrellas tomorrow okay.

So there's a market for oil today. Oil tomorrow. Oil in a year's time.

Futures market you say no that's not enough.

You need to assume that there are also contingent markets.

Well, it's a contingent market. It's a it's like an option or something.

Right. So it's a market for umbrellas tomorrow if it rains and there's a market for umbrellas tomorrow if it doesn't rain.

Right. So it's like an insurance market.

It's, um, value of a contract if they steal your car and the value of the contract if they don't steal your car.

Right. And so you have a full set of, of markets.

Okay. By the way, if you make those assumptions, market outcomes are efficient.

So you can see why I thought that market outcomes are never efficient.

But because the conditions under which markets would be efficient are quite restrictive.

Anyway, but in that model. Volatility wouldn't matter.

So you have some volatile income in the future. You just exchange it for some fixed asset.

No secure asset today. You can do that because markets are complete.

So chiller would have sold all its future copper revenues and bought um riskless bond and live off of the rents of that.

You know the interest on on that bond and then it wouldn't matter anymore what would happen to the volatility of your exports.

You have insured yourself against it. So your volatility doesn't matter.

Okay. Now and then we assume ehm it's worse.

So so you need to argue that volatility matters.

You need to argue for some kind of market incompleteness. If markets are incomplete then volatility has more of a chance to matter.

Okay. So. So let's assume that there are no contingent markets.

So you cannot insure against the future. But you can borrow.

Okay. So let's assume that you can't insure against the future.

But you can borrow then volatility would be a problem.

But it wouldn't be a huge problem because you know there might be shocks to your economy,

but you can smooth your consumption by borrowing in bad times and paying back in good times.

So if you kind of borrow anti cyclically then you smooth your consumption and so on.

So since say economists think that utility comes from consumption, you keep consumption relatively stable.

So your utilities relatively stable. You don't suffer from volatility.

Governments are going to try to do the same thing.

They're going to try to borrow in bad times when taxes, tax revenues are low, and maybe unemployment insurance payments are high, right.

And then you pay back in good times. So aren't they cyclical fiscal policies are going to help you smooth.

Right.

And if we learn from the national accounts thing, if the private sector is borrowing and the public sector is borrowing, who are they borrowing from?

Yeah, they have to be borrowing from the rest of the world.

Right. So that means that if you borrow from the rest of the world in bad times and you pay back in good times, you smooth things out, right?

Well, it just so happens that when you look at the world Bank, lending looks cyclical.

So banks tend to lend you an umbrella when it's sunny and they want it back when it starts to rain.

Mhm. Okay. Ehm. Oops.

What happened there I. This is not close to the end.

Yeah, I'm. Probably.

Uh. No. POW pow pow pow.

Anybody home? Yeah. Yeah.

Okay. So. Yeah.

Fiscal policy looks pro cyclical and capital flows.

International capital flows look pro cyclical.

So the things that we would have assumed are going to help you stabilize seem to be part of a part of the problem and not part of a solution.

Let me show you some evidence for that. There is enormous variation.

And in this is the volatility of GDP and measured for this period of almost 40 years.

I took out the Covid period so as not to and put additional stuff.

But you see that all rich countries are kind of growing at the same rate with the same volatility.

No. And then you have this enormous volatility in GDP and in other places.

And this is the volatility of tax revenues. So some places you know the volatility of tax revenues are in the single digits here.

You have countries that are you know 20% volatility 30% volatility 40% volatility in tax revenues okay.

But this is another form of eyeball econometrics.

Okay. On the left I've put a industrialized countries in and on the right have put Latin America.

And I'm graphing two variables. One is the peak to trough decline in GDP.

And the second one is the worsening of the fiscal deficit.

Okay. The green one is the worsening of the fiscal deficit, and which is what you would expect in bad times.

You run a deficit, right, to borrow. So I want to make the following observations that these red bars are bigger than these red bars.

You accept that the econometric statement.

All right. And then that the green bars here point in the same direction as the red bars.

And they tend to be bigger than the red bars. So you deteriorate your fiscal deficit more than 1 to 1 in bad times.

Here the green bars are all over the place. Sometimes they go in the opposite direction.

They are never as big as the red bars. So this kind of suggests that fiscal policy might be playing a role here.

Then it's not playing here. Same point is made in this in this graph here I put the volatility of GDP.

And here I put the legality of government spending.

That is whether it's the correlation coefficient of government spending to GDP.

So you see that these countries, the government gives very volatile, and the government tends to spend in good times and cut back in bad times.

And here these negative numbers suggest the opposite.

The government borrows in bad times. And, um.

Um, and and it spends less in good times.

Okay. So, you know, correlation is not causation.

You can say, uh, if if you're going to be parasitical in your official policy, you're kind of amplifying your shocks.

I would expect you to be more volatile.

But there may be other forms of causality that if you're very volatile, maybe it's hard for fiscal policy to be to be anticipated.

And that's a model I'm going to show you on Thursday.

Okay. And. So what could cause, um, volatility.

Why and why would some, some countries systematically be more volatile than other countries.

Okay. So I'm going to argue that there's some kind of market incompleteness.

So you know in order to produce you need inputs. You need workers.

You need, you know, money, you need infrastructure, you need security.

And, you know, some kind of rule enforcement, right? If something breaks down, you know, you cannot replicate the cycle.

So for example. A.

If you have an Uber car, if you have a car, you can drive Uber and make money, right?

But the car needs gasoline. Right.

So you need gasoline to drive a car. So if you don't have gasoline, you cannot drive a car.

So you cannot make the money. To buy the gasoline to use the car.

So if suddenly you lose access to finance. You cannot buy the gasoline.

So you cannot use your labor. You cannot use your car because you don't have the gasoline.

So these cycles that are dependent on everything being in place may get disrupted if something breaks down.

For example, finance allows you to to make sure that these things don't matter.

So you need gasoline to drive a number, but you need to drive in order to pay for the gasoline.

Credit solves this chicken and egg problem. If I suddenly take credit out of the picture because there's a financial crisis or something,

then suddenly you might get quickly into trouble in this one is, I don't know.

I mean, as a Venezuelan, we are super knowledgeable about these things.

Yeah, I'd rather we. We are.

Or we were historically notorious drinkers of Scotch whiskey.

We argue it goes well with the weather. Would you agree?

I think we should test these approaches as an in class mix.

Now, how do you make whiskey? Okay.

What's, uh, what's the process of making whiskey from, um.

Corn rice and that distillation. Right.

But neither corn nor rice. But you're right.

Barley. But. But what do you do with a barley processor then?

You put it in casks. And at the age. Well, yeah, the aging process will go later.

But, uh, you know, there is, uh, something fermentation before fermentation to grow the barley, uh, grow the body,

you grow the barley a little bit, and at a certain point that you grow the barley, you stop the process.

Okay? That's called malted barley.

So you malt the barley and that's you allow it to start, and then you stop the process and you start the process typically by toasting the, the,

the you kind of kill the barley, you know,

and they do it historically and they do it with a very inefficient or dirty type of coal in Scotland that they call pit.

And uh, Pete, Pete, Pete. And, and in some places they want to use more peat so it has more of the flavor in others.

Okay. So now you know that. Uh, yeah.

So, um, so you made malted barley with barley.

Now, how much barley does Scotland make? Zero.

Zero zero. So they don't make any barley.

So, um, do you need barley to make Scotch whiskey?

No. Well, yes.

Not really. Right. If you can make whiskey, you can sell the whiskey.

And with the money, you can buy the barley to make the whiskey. Right.

So trade may allow you to function.

Right. But if for some reason the trade gets disrupted, you know, Scotland gets screwed because yeah,

they know how to make Scotch whiskey provided that they have the barley.

But if they don't get the barley, they can't make the Scotch whiskey. Okay.

So trade might facilitate a certain equilibrium if it gets disrupted.

You can see how things can turn back. Okay. So so I'm going to argue that what could cause volatility well might be real shocks.

But these real shocks must be amplified for some reason because everybody gets shocks.

And then you know something might prevent the government from acting on pay cyclically.

And that's the fiscal stories that I'm going to tell on Thursday.

Something my my prevent households from smoothing consumption.

Maybe domestic finance doesn't work together too well.

And maybe something prevents a the country from smoothing shocks because of bad international finance.

And I'm going to try to discuss that on Thursday.

So there's going to have to be some interaction between shocks that you get and your inability to cope with those shocks.

Okay. Good.

So I'm going to uh, in the remainder of this class, I'm going to present a model of why volatility might matter when countries face maybe call them,

uh, in terms of trade volatility, no shocks to the price of your exports.

Or imports. And this is inspired by the fact that, you know, Im a this is the rate of growth of all the developing countries where,

um, oil exporters grew less than oil importers.

You might say, well, you know, if your country has oil, it should be a good thing.

But it just so happens that if you have oil get screwed, you know, because in this period between 1960 and 1980, maybe oil prices were good.

So you actually grew more than the average of the developing countries over that than the non oil developing countries.

But when oil prices don't do too well they do much worse.

So in the end having oil might not have been that great a thing.

So this kind of like a yeah in the resource curse.

So for example this is a GDP of Saudi Arabia.

Uh this is the GDP of Nigeria.

This is a GDP of Venezuela. Because I had more data on Venezuela.

This is the non-oil GDP. And so this is excluding the oil sector, just the rest of the economy.

And so I had problems of uh, had some other problems in Venezuela.

Yes, yes. But if you notice, one of the most impressive things about this time series is this peak here.

You see that peak? That's when I was minister.

Okay. So you see that in Venezuela, output per worker declined, capital per worker declined.

And the volatility, this is the volatility of oil revenues that stayed more or less the same.

But the volatility of the real exchange rate went through the roof. So that's a little bit.

What's motivating me is um you know how the [INAUDIBLE] they can get into serious trouble because of volatility by other oil exporting countries.

This is Indonesia. You don't observe the same things. You observe some wiggles, but you know, or even Mexico.

You observe something maybe associated with oil, but you don't.

But the wiggles are not as big. Okay. So the question is why some countries can be oil exporters and not be so unstable.

Others are very unstable. And it's not just oil.

This is Zambia. For Zambia it's copper.

Um, and this is, you know, the exports of copper in Zambia and GDP in Zambia, you see that big kind of like are highly correlated.

Whatever happens to exports gets transmitted into GDP.

So. Why might there be a resource curse?

There's a long discussion in the literature. Some people talk about the Dutch disease.

I'm going to explain and what that is. Um, but typically that would explain why good times are kind of bad, but not why bad times are also bad.

Um, as we'll see. Second is, you know, rent seeking that, you know, if you have something like oil or mineral wealth and so on,

that gets taxed a lot, although money's in the government, so everybody's playing to get their money on the government budget.

And that maybe takes the entrepreneurial spirits away from being creative and to being to just, uh, you know, grabbing the money where it is.

It could be something about these resources being in the, in the very smart part of the product space where,

you know, there aren't too many, um, products, uh, you know, trees around the monkeys, or it could be volatility.

And in this lecture I'm going to explain how volatility might be the problem.

So you remember the product space. This happens to be oil.

This happens to be copper. So they're all very peripheral in the product space.

They don't have too many connections etc. So if you specialize in oil maybe maybe that's part of the story.

And this is the GDP per capita, um, of countries.

And this is how well positioned they are in the product space. And the red ones are the oil exporting ones.

So they tend to be a poorly positioned in the product space okay.

And. So I'm going to briefly explain the model I have in mind.

I'm going to assume three sectors aim.

And there's going to be perfectly mobile capital.

Internationally, capital can move in and out perfectly from to the rest of the world.

So that's going to equalize the rates of return to capital. So if capital had the higher return in the country, capital would flow in.

If it had lower return in the country, capital would flow out to the rest of the world, equalizes the rate of return to capital.

And labor is perfectly mobile between sectors. So you can work in the tradable sector.

In the non-tradable sector, labor can move perfectly.

Okay. And I'm going to assume that there are three sectors.

There's a sector, call it oil, copper aid, whatever, which is like manna from heaven comes.

It's dollars that come from heaven, okay. It's costless.

It's just there. Okay. And then you have a tradable sector that uses capital and labor like in last lecture.

And Non-tradable sector uses capital and labor. Okay.

I'm going to do away with the government. So I'm going to transfer the oil income directly to households.

And the punchline of this model is that the production possibility frontier is flat.

Sort of like the idea is the following. Right? A I think you've seen this graph before.

This is the market for non-tradable, right?

Supply and demand. This is the market for tradable.

It's just the same, except that there's an international price.

And you're going to consume where the where the demand curve hits the international price.

You're going to produce where the supply curve hits the international price.

And you're going to import the difference. Shocks to the demand of tradable go into imports.

Right. So you keep on producing there.

But now you consume here. So now the gap is bigger. You import more.

Right. So the tradable sector is not Keynesian.

It's not demand. It goes right. And um changes in the real exchange rate are going to make tradable is more expensive.

So people are wanting to consume less of them and wanting to produce more of them.

So maybe something that was an import becomes an export.

Okay. If the real exchange rate moves, this is the same thing as I did on BBN, right?

Same story. So this is going to be a very simple intuitive representation of the model.

I have my three sectors. This is how much it produces is how much I spend.

I'm going to inform you of the following facts about this economy.

That oil generates 20. And it's manna from heaven.

It's not something you consume. It's just a check that somebody sends.

Okay. And I'm also going to tell you that when everybody in this economy is employed, people produce 100, full employment output is 100.

Since they're not employed in the oil sector. So total output is 120 100 and non-oil 2018 oil.

Okay. Now, if I want this economy to be an external balance, what does that imply?

For, say, total consumption. You have to consider, huh?

When you have to consume 120. But because we said that, you know, um, in an economy as a whole.

Huh? Income has to equal to spending. If residents spend more than their income, then foreigners have more income than we're spending.

So excessive spending of residents would be, uh, a deficit.

So if you don't want to have a deficit, you have to spend 120. Now, I'm going to give you another rule of this model.

And that rule of this model says that people like to consume tradable in non-tradable in equal proportions.

They like to spend 50% of their money in tradable and 50% of their money in non-tradable.

That's kind of like a Cop Douglas utility function with a coefficient of 0.5.

So you always want to spend half and a half. Okay. So.

Now if you want to consume non-tradable 60 and non-tradable, how many non-tradable do you have to produce?

Why? Because there are some who?

Because our demand determined, right? So how many non-tradable am I going to produce if I want to consume 60 and tradable?

How many tradable do I have to produce? Why 40?

You want to consume 60? That adds up to 100 now.

Uh, this has to add up to 100, right? All right.

Okay. So you have to be believe in yourself. Okay.

Okay. So how do you balance a tradable sector?

You're spending 60 and you're perusing 40. I do export oil and export animals.

So you export oil and you import renewables. See, the thing about tradable is that they are imported oil.

And the thing about oil is that it's only good to import.

That's the only thing you can do about it. So so now let me assume that I increase exports of oil from 20 to 40.

Okay. How is the economy going to respond? So let's do that exercise.

Okay. So now this is 40 instead of 20. Okay.

This stays at 100 because I'm at full employment. I spend.

So my income is 140 has gone up by 20.

If I want to keep in balance, I have to spend 140.

I told you I like to spend 5050, so now I spend 70 and 70.

But if I'm spending 70 in trade in Non-tradable, I need to produce 70 in Non-tradable.

Right? Ergo, how much not?

How much tradable do I produce? How much did you say?

But I'm perusing 70. So that means that the production of tradable has to go down.

The production of tradable has to go down. And that's what they call the Dutch disease.

Okay. That when you become, you know, something makes you richer.

You want to spend more. You have to produce the non-tradable but the tradable you can import.

So if the economy is constrained by full employment, it's going to move its workers to the non-tradable sector.

It's going to have to take them out of the tradable sector. And okay, so this is telling you the same story with little graphs.

This is an economy with two sectors tradable and non-tradable.

This is the production possibility frontier. If you put everybody to produce tradable they produce 100.

If you put everybody to produce non-tradable they produce 100. And any combination between the two.

This is a production possibility. Frontier. If you assume that labor is perfectly mobile, that capital is perfectly mobile.

That production possibility frontier is flat. And what is the slope of that frontier?

Slope of that frontier is some rate of transformation of tradable into non-tradable.

That is the real exchange rate. So if this production possibility frontier is flat, the real exchange rate is going to be stable.

Okay. You had a question back there. Um, is this assuming that there is no way to import people?

Because in that case, you could export oil, but import labor cannot put trade center.

That is a great question. And that characterizes in my mind the Gulf.

The Gulf has an open labor market. So when the price of oil labor goes up, goes up, labor goes up.

When the price of oil goes down, labor goes down. That's actually for reasons we will see.

It's going to make the real exchange rate more stable. And that is maybe the secret sauce that allows them to back to the dollar.

Because in some sense they are exporting their oil volatility to the true South Asia.

Okay. But so now I'm going to add oil.

And oil is going to be just a shift of this curve up by the amount of this 2020 in oil that I had given you.

So now the economy instead of consuming here is going to want to consume here and to produce down here.

And the difference is oil. So you see that from here to here Non-tradable went up tradable went down.

And that's okay because you have this to this shift in the in the curve, which is the amount of oil you have that you can now use to import.

Okay, good. Now if things are not that easy to move from one sector to the other, then this curve is probably going to look like this.

Which means that the slope of the production possibility frontier is going to imply some shift.

So if you want to go from here to here, the real exchange rate is going to appreciate it's going to make non-tradable relatively more expensive.

That's their trick to attract labor out of the tradable sector.

Okay. If things are a little bit more complicated. Okay.

But suppose that we forget about this for a second.

There is the possibility that the economy has so much oil that it ends up being at this point.

And at this point, there is no way if you increase, if the price of oil goes up and you want to consume more non-tradable,

there is no way for the economy to produce more non-tradable because it's run out of people.

Okay. So the economy's going to start pivoting around this corner.

And if it starts pivoting around this corner, it means that the real exchange rate is going to become really volatile.

Okay. You can imagine a story where it's a little bit smoother.

It's some combination of this plus this kink here.

That's when the non-oil tradable sector essentially disappears.

And all your tradable is are oil. So it's you know, and then if that's the case,

then if suddenly you have a boom in oil prices and you want to spend more, say you want to spend more in cars,

which is of tradable and in restaurants which is a non tradable,

you have no more people to move to the non-tradable sector because there are already all in the non tradable sector.

And then the adjustment is going to make non-tradable more expensive on the demand side, but not on the supply side.

There's going to be no expansion in supply because you're already at full employment.

So we developed a model to essentially try to capture what would happen in that situation.

So we're assuming there's one little interesting factoid.

That is doing a lot of the work in the model,

and that is that we're going to assume some financial imperfection where investors are not going to be risk neutral.

Yes. Just thinking about, um, other mechanisms to like, try to balance and things.

Um, if the country doesn't want to be on balance, could be like that.

That way to, like, confront all of these, like, uh, consequences of their own wealth.

And so a good question gets answered by a subsequent slide.

I hope to get to contrast Chile and Venezuela just to make you guys feel better about yourself.

So I'm going to go there. Yeah. So so look at what's going to happen.

Profits. Are going to be the price times quantity minus a wages times employment.

Right. In the non-tradable sector in good times maybe wages go up because there's a lot of demand for labor.

But the prices of non-tradable also go up.

So in some sense this kind of balances this you know, in good times, if you have a McDonald's, the price of McDonald's goes up, but your wages go up.

And in bad times you have to lower the price of McDonald's, but your wages are also lower.

So the profits in the non-tradable sector are a little bit hedged.

The prices in the tradable sector. Yeah.

Well, prices are set internationally. So in good times, nothing happens to your price, but your wages go up.

So in good times you are doing poorly in bad times.

Maybe the exchange rate depreciates so your prices are going up and your wages are down.

So you know, bad times are super good for you.

So the profits of the tradable sector are going to be much more volatile than the profits of the non-tradable sector.

That's going to make the capital market charge a higher interest rate to the non tradable sector.

So essentially the argument is that if you have a small tradable sector, you're very close to that corner.

That where things start to pivot that generates more real exchange rate volatility.

The bigger your real exchange rate volatility the riskier the tradable sector is going to be perceived.

Right, because its profits are going to be very, very volatile.

And that's going to lead to lower investment and trade tradable, which is going to leave you with a small tradable sector.

Okay. So the example I like to give is the Island of Margarita.

Everybody knows where the island of Marguerita is. And let's ask him Alberto.

In Venezuela, it's the most beautiful island in the Caribbean.

I can observe it objectively. Prove it to you. It just happens to be in Venezuela.

There isn't a barrel of oil in the island of Marguerita.

No oil whatsoever in the Marguerita. But since it's part of Venezuela and Venezuela has a super volatile real exchange rate tourism.

And Marguerita was never able to develop because sometimes, you know, Venezuela is very competitive and Margarita can become a tourist destination.

But in other times, Venezuela is super expensive and nobody goes there.

And since, you know, hotels have to have a certain expectation of occupancy, nobody wants to invest in in in Marguerita.

And next door you have ugly islands like Aruba and Curacao and that are really boring.

You would agree with you. So but their income per capita is like five times that of Marguerita, in spite of their natural and.

So as the economy becomes more specialized, the real exchange rate becomes more volatile.

Interest rates for tradable go up, tradable sector shrinks, making the economy even more specialized until you arrive at a corner.

And the idea is that suppose this is your average oil income, and this is how volatile is your oil income.

If your oil income is not volatile at all, you remain diversified.

But if your oil income becomes more volatile, then suddenly you stop producing other trade bubbles because it's just too risky.

Okay. And this is what happens to the volatility of the real exchange rate.

If you're not at the corner, it's relatively low.

But once you get to a corner and it becomes super volatile, interest rates for tradable go up investments in tradable collapses.

And this I would say is what happened in Venezuela when you get, you know, sort of the explosion, the volatility of the real exchange rate.

So this was since 1957, the real exchange rate and suddenly did that.

Okay. So if that's a real exchange rate, nobody wants to touch the tradable sector.

And if nobody touches a tradable sector then the only game in town is oil.

And and consequently there's nothing to absorb shocks okay.

So let me compare Chile to Venezuela.

Um, these are the terms of trade in, in both.

So you see, in this period, in the terms of trade improved more or less the same in both countries.

Now the question is what did Chile do with the boom.

Oops. So Chile saved the boom.

This is the budget balance. They ran a very big surplus. And they only cut that surplus down when the terms of trade deteriorated here.

Okay. Why Venezuela? When they saw the boom, they just went into deficit.

They spent everything. They spent all of it. So they spent all of the boom, plus some.

They went into deficit. Okay.

As a consequence, the real exchanger in Venezuela became super responsive to that boom in in the terms of trade in Chile,

because they saved a lot of it. The real exchange rate remained stable.

Because they were spending part of it. This was the boom in in exports.

And this is the boom in imports in China. So both exports and imports kept on growing because they were in a boom.

Imports went up. But. It didn't move exports from there trend in Venezuela.

Exports went down when imports went down.

So you you you this kind of like evidence of Dutch disease out there are is hurting your tradable sector because you're spending too much money.

Okay. So, um. So why?

What is the difference? And the difference is that Chile has a spending rule out of copper income.

They have a committee that decides how much to spend in copper income.

And and they calculate like a structural budget.

Right. And so they save the copper booms and they do save the copper busts and, and that's,

that's why they are able to have a stable real exchange rate and have a framework where,

yeah, copper might be booming, but what does that have to do with wine?

What does that have to do with salmon. What does that have to do with other things.

So so you can keep an environment where your tradable sector, your non-corporate tradable sector and Chile can keep growing.

In Venezuela you get a boom, you spend it all and then some.

So the real exchange rate goes through the roof. Your tradable sector gets wiped out.

And then when the price of oil declines, you no longer have a tradable sector that can recover.

So so. So this says something about you needing to impose some mechanism to save the booms so that you can save in the busts.

Ideally, you would want the process to be institutionalized would be relatively simple to do.

The Chileans have delegated it to a commission.

I'm going to show you what we did in Kazakhstan, which is to create a formula for the government to, to save.

And and you would want that formula to deliver a volatility reduction, even if you don't know what's going to happen to a price of oil.

So you don't know what the future brings, but you want to have stability anyway.

And this is the same formula we came up with. Okay.

All the oil money is going to go to a fund.

100% of the oil money is going to go to a fund, and a certain transfer is going to go from the fund to the budget every year.

How much money? Well, it's this formula. This is the transfers to the budget.

So this this this fund is going to act as a buffer.

It's going to protect the country from the volatility in oil prices.

You are wishing the oil price to end.

So this is the fund. All the oil money goes to the fund.

And out of this comes a transfer to the budget.

And what you want is these transfers to be relatively stable.

But you don't know what's going to happen to your price. So the way the Chileans did it, they say we don't know.

But there are some wise people who do. Right, and we delegate on them.

You know, if it's, uh, if it's a random walk, then there's no there's no wisdom needed.

The market tells you what's the the future is the expected future.

Price is just the present. So this works.

It doesn't matter, eh, what the price of oil is.

This is going to work. It's going to say, because you consumed a certain amount last year.

This alpha, hopefully relatively close to one, is going to help me stabilize the transfer.

This.

