[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Yes. You know. Okay.

What? Uh, talk about, uh, recruiting.

Uh, anyway, you know what I mean? And.

Uh. So.

Yeah. Okay. Okay.

Good to see you.

About. All right, Norris, let's get going.

Um, so we're in, uh, section of the course where we're thinking about volatility.

What are the, um, structural things that may make an economy more unstable?

So before we go there, let me some housekeeping.

Uh, so you submit the problem set forth.

Congratulations. Problem set five is going to be, um, macro diagnostics.

And it's due November 26th. Wrong sized.

Um. Uh, you can.

I strongly recommend that you request, uh, office hours maybe with me to for the micro diagnostic, uh, for the overall projects.

And also during your group hours on Monday and during your assigned time slots.

It's getting closer to November 9th, which is December, which is when you present your final report.

Seven. Okay. You know, you want to do a good job in them.

So last week we discussed how many developing countries are much more volatile across many different measures.

Um. Uh, and that in the presence of some market imperfections, volatility is bad for welfare.

We also discussed the one source of volatility which you see shocks to your terms of trade or your access to to aid or finance,

which would have moved in some sense the curve up or down.

Today we will discuss another source of volatility, which is the difficulty that countries have in running counter-cyclical fiscal policies.

They tend to run cyclical fiscal policy.

So if you are expansionary and expansions and contractionary and contraction of them, you won't be surprised that you are very volatile.

So the government is kind of like an amplifier of shock.

Ehm, in the review session and we will talk about fiscal sustainability and how to measure fiscal sustainability.

And that's going to be important for your assignment and so on. So don't miss the review session.

And on Tuesday I'm going to talk about the budget institutions and uh kind of

political economy distortions that may be behind problems in fiscal policy.

Okay. So that's where we're going. So. A.

So we'll start with the question of what should fiscal policy look like in theory and how does it look like in practice?

Okay, so if you take, uh, Keynesian view of the world, uh, you know, you think of fiscal policy as a business cycle management tool, right?

So aggregate demand is not necessarily at full employment.

You want aggregate demand to be at full employment. And so if the economy is depressed you want to stimulate it.

And if the economy is is overheating you want to slow down.

So you're playing this Nintendo game with BBN. And fiscal policy is what moves you to the left and to the right of that bank.

Okay. So in a you know, there is an argument that fiscal policy might be particularly effective when monetary policy is not effective.

And those are in cases when you're, you know, in what Keynes called a liquidity trap.

It's not a very frequent phenomenon in developing countries, but for reasons that we will discuss next week,

monetary policy tends to be particularly weak in developing countries, and also has often plays on parasitical rather than a countercyclical role.

For reasons that I will elaborate on, which are not unrelated to the reasons, I will elaborate today.

Now, the problem with fiscal policy. Is that it suffers from long and variable lags.

So you decide that the economy is in recession. You decide you want to spend more money.

So you have to. You are the Minister of Finance.

You want to spend more money. So you first you have to convince the cabinet.

Then you have to go to Congress to ask for money.

Then Congress approves it. You allocate it to ministries.

Ministries have to contract it out. Government procurement is typically complicated.

So by the time the government is spending the money, you decided it might be nine months down the road.

And then until it takes effect, it might be six more months or or so.

So you're talking about a year and a bit. And by then maybe the economy is no longer in a recession.

Right. So it's a little bit like you've probably had this experience of controlling the temperature of the shower when there's a lag between,

you know, when you turn the thing and when the water changes temperature.

So you're constantly scalding yourself and freezing yourself because you know,

you cannot anticipate how long it will take for for the response to happen.

So this is all in theory.

So in theory you should observe ex-post the fiscal policy looks and basically go that's what you should observe.

I'm going to tell you in a while if it does. Okay.

And then came in the 1970s and 80s.

This a new classical critique of Keynesian approach that was related to the rational expectations revolution in macroeconomics.

I, you know, started to see agents as forward looking, a people that are looking ahead, what's going to happen and,

and government and people do not see government debt that they may own as a source of wealth.

So they think, you know, the government, the private sector was running a surplus.

They use that surplus to buy government bonds. These government bonds pay an interest rate.

So it's part of your wealth. But the critique was yeah, it's part of your wealth.

But how is the government going to pay you? The government is going to pay you by taxing you.

So if you incorporate the fact that the government will have to tax you more in order to serve a bigger debt,

yes, you're making money on the debt, but you're paying more. You are expected to pay more money on the taxes.

Okay. So the Ricardian equivalence.

And this is not me. Okay.

Says that, you know, an increase in current spending. I interpreted as an increase in my future taxes, and so I don't feel any better.

Um, so it's useless from the point of view of demand management.

So let me show you very simply, sort of like the logic.

So you have a simple model with two periods.

And to make things simple, let's take the interest rate to be zero.

So when you look at the future you don't have to discount anything.

Okay. The government is going to have two periods and the government wants to consume in this period and the next period.

But the government only taxes in the second period.

Okay. So it means it's going to run the deficit this period.

It's going to tax you in the next period. And the private sector has uh, an income say y1, y2 for each period.

So if the government balances its budget it means that.

A it has to collect in the next period enough taxes to pay for two years of spending.

Okay. So that's the government budget constraint.

The private sector budget constraint is they have Y1 in income in this period.

The first period. In the second period they have one minus p y2.

Because in the next year they will be taxed by the government.

And with that they are supposed to consume C1 and C2 because they are optimizing intertemporal utility.

Right. They are going to equate C1 to C2.

They're going to spend equal amounts in this period. And next year they're going to smooth consumption.

Right. And. And so that's going to be private sector consumption.

And once you substitute the taxes from the balanced budget equation of the government, which is this one, right.

So the taxes is just two g over y2.

You get that an increase in government spending causes a decline in government and private consumption of the same amount.

Okay. So. The way it works is the government spends more money.

The people looking forward realize that they will have to pay the taxes for it.

So they they don't and they don't they don't.

They cut their spending now. So it doesn't even the idea that fiscal policy is ineffective at affecting how much the private sector spends.

Okay. That's the Ricardian critique. However, the Ricardian framework gives you a rationale for tax moving.

And the idea is that all taxes are distortion free so that they generate the loss in this case.

To make it simple, I'll make the loss quadratic. So when you take derivatives A the distortion is linear.

All right. Okay. So because of this, this quadratic loss function, the government has this budget constraint,

spends in the two periods, taxes in the first period, and in the second period you can choose the tax rate.

The optimization is going to lead to a having a constant tax rate, because if you have a lower tax rate than one period,

then in the other period you're you're paying a higher tax rate than one period, you're going to square that.

If you're squaring things the minimum square you can have, the minimum rectangle you can have is a square round.

So so it's going to want you to smooth tax rates.

So optimal policy is going to be that we're going to choose a single tax rate a stable to smooth tax rate.

That makes the intertemporal budget constraint of the government for the two periods solvent.

So the government has enough to pay everything in the two periods.

So how would it look? Well, it would look like governments running deficits in bad times.

They don't want to raise taxes in bad times. They want to smooth the tax rate to reduce the.

So we've lost and and in good times they don't want to lower tax rates.

They want to keep the tax rate, collect more money and just save it okay.

So it's going to look enormously similar to Keynesians.

So you would not be able to tell the difference if the government is inspired by um, by.

Um. What's his name? Robert, uh, our professor here of mackerel in the yard.

Robert Barrow. You want to know if they're inspired by Barrow or by King's?

It would look. Both would look. Countercyclical. Okay.

Yes. When we came. Students be okay with having different tax rates.

Well, yeah, you could, um. I think Keynesians would easily accept the argument that stable tax rates would be better.

So. This is I look across the world at the largest recessions in low income countries and middle income,

low and middle income countries in high income countries. And ask myself, what did they do with their fiscal deficit?

And you see that essentially the fiscal deficit does not compensate for the recession.

This is another way of looking at these are recessions in OECD countries.

These are recessions in Latin American countries. In the dollar, falling GDP is the red bar.

The worsening of the fiscal balance is the green bar.

Okay. And I want to make two points, which I'm going to prove to you using eyeball econometrics.

The first one is that these red bars look smaller than these red bars.

You buy that argument. And the second one is that these green bars are more or less of the size of the red bars, if not bigger.

Well, here the green bars are small and if anything all over the place, sometimes they,

you know, they you reduce the fiscal deficit in, in, in the middle of a recession.

Okay. So. This looks kind of like anti cyclical.

This doesn't. In addition.

Um. This is the volatility of countries.

And this is the cyclicality of their policies. And there tends to be a positive correlation between how volatile you are and how parasitical you are.

So fiscal policy seems to be legal in many countries.

I want to know if it is cyclical in your countries.

So I want you to run a correlation of government spending and GDP or government spending growth and GDP growth.

And if that correlation is negative and you're countercyclical, if that correlation is positive then you're appropriately.

Okay. In addition, countries have very precarious access to finance.

Okay. This is the bond spreads.

It's a measure of country risk by emerging markets.

And this is how much more than the US Treasury.

Uh, an emerging market bond pays on average. Each country is going to have a different, uh, country risk.

But I'm showing you here the average. And notice that this is 200 basis points more than the Treasury.

And this is 1200 basis points more than the Treasury, say treasuries are these days are around four, usually were around two so or three.

So you know, at best they pay 202% more than U.S. treasuries, sometimes 12% more than restrictions.

Now, it would be one thing for you to tell me that, you know, emerging markets are risky.

You tell me emerging markets are risky. I would expect to see a high spread or you tell me, you know, emerging markets are not risky.

And then I would expect to see a low spread. But the thing is that sometimes it looks like a high spread.

Sometimes it low spreads. So the spread is the volatility in the spread is orders of magnitude, the changes in the interest rate of U.S. treasuries.

Okay. So it means that the financial markets look at Mexico and one day they see in Mexico, a country that is just south of the US.

The next day they wake up and they think of Mexico as a country just north of Guatemala.

And they they have trouble making their so their minds as to what's the relevant comparator.

So ay, ay, when there is a shock, you know, the increase in the perception of risk goes up enormously.

So there's, for some reason, precarious access to finance.

Why the [INAUDIBLE] would be a feature of the world that you would like to understand?

And, um, the final thing that you might want to say about fiscal policy is that it shows some signs of being political.

If you run, um, a regression of all the, um, uh, fiscal deficits in the world.

You put, um, a country fixed effect that captures, uh, characteristic, constant characteristics of a country.

You put a year fixed effects that puts something about what's happening in the world in that year,

and then you put a dummy for whether this year is an election year or a post election year.

These are the dummies. It says that in the election year you spend more money in the post election year.

You you you spend less.

Okay, so you say, well, gee, apparently, you know, when we were talking about kings or or the Ricardian equivalence, there were no elections.

So why the [INAUDIBLE] would elections have anything to do with fiscal policy?

Right? We'll have more to say about this on Tuesday.

Yes, it is true for non Latin American countries as well, like other countries I would suggest in this I did only for Latin American countries.

I encourage you to to redo it for more countries.

I you have to collect the data on elections and decide if these elections are meaningful or not.

But you know so. So.

Some questions we would like to ask is why do developing countries face precarious access to borrowing?

Is it because they borrow too much? Is it because they tax too little?

Yes. Yes. So how?

I mean, potentially stupid question, but how is this different from a country without going into an election,

changing tax rates from one year to another for other reasons? Well, I I mean, countries may make decisions whenever they want.

And for whatever reason, I'm only showing that on average and over time,

they seem to be making different fiscal decisions when there's an election than when there isn't.

Uh huh. On average. So one question we want to ask is why is access to finance precarious?

Number two is why do they observe cyclicals rather than cyclical fiscal policy.

And why is there an electoral budget cycle. So I'm going to try to answer those the first two questions in this lecture.

Okay. So the first thing that you would a m want to ask is, have countries borrowed too much?

And and the reason why they can't access finance is because the there's their spend through their spend.

Spendthrift is the right word or is it the opposite. They are irresponsible.

They just spend too much. Not like us. Not like you know.

Maybe they're just irresponsible people.

So actually that ratios in developing countries tend to be smaller than that ratios in industrialized countries.

So the first thing that people look at is this debt to GDP ratio.

So you can look at the debt to GDP ratio. And you will find that this are the debt to GDP ratios for all the countries in the world.

And this is their credit rating. So 100 is triple A.

And you know where these countries are essentially in default.

Okay. And you have everything in between. What do you observe is a clear linear relationship between debt to GDP ratios and credit ratings.

Right. Not at all.

Right. Not at all. You have the Netherlands at the same debt to GDP ratio as Georgia or Ghana or whatever.

And you see Canada with a bigger debt to GDP ratio than in Salvador and at completely opposite ends of the credit rating.

So, so there's very little if you tell me a debt to GDP ratio, it doesn't inform me at all about your credit rating.

Not at all. Okay. So so if they have a low credit rating, it's not because of the high debt to GDP ratio.

So it's not because they borrow too much. Yes we can help with something like that.

And I think that probably when Greece got all the debt it was probably a better rating or like Lebanon or any kind of at some point cut some rating.

So that's a change when we see their rating, when they go to debt for like something you can um.

I mean, you could do this. Uh, I did it for 2020.

You're asking about the time series and a I can't I can't say anything about the time series.

Eventually, they downgraded Japan after Japan got to 260% of GDP.

Um, you know, but at 260%.

But all of these countries are in default, right? Uh, way before they got to 260% of GDP.

Right. And they only downgraded to here now.

So. Yes. Oh, sure.

Oh, the. Um, this is a greeting.

Um, like before the adoption or before they adopted Bitcoin.

Uh, well, a bitcoin was very young in 2020, so yeah, it was before Bitcoin.

So you might say I would expect you to say because to say because they're smart people to say hey one second, one second.

Don't go that fast. Because who told you that you paid public debt with GDP?

Maybe you actually pay public debt with a part of GDP the government can grab.

And maybe poorer countries have a lower capacity to tax than rich countries.

So what matters is your capacity to service.

And that has to do not with GDP, but with a part of GDP that the government gets its hands on with the tax revenue.

So maybe we should measure things as debt to tax revenue ratio.

Okay. Where is the tax rate and why is GDP so in the denominator.

Have tax revenue. So it's in some sense how many years of tax revenue is your debt.

Okay. So this this would have, uh, a measure of multiples, multiples of yearly tax revenues.

Well, maybe this is the explanation, right? It's convincing explanation.

Uh, so this is what you get. Also super predictive, right?

And you have countries like the US, uh, had the same debt to GDP ratio as Argentina and completely different, um.

So. Not the answer.

Okay, good. So the plot thickens. Now, what else could be missing?

You're going to tell me? I understand it's because what matters is not what is your debt relative to your tax revenue?

What matters is what is your debt service relative to tax revenues?

Right. So what matters is something like this. It's really how much does the debt cost?

Vis-a-vis your tax base. Right. And once you do it this way, then yes.

You know, Latin American countries are spending more of their tax revenue and interest than all OECD countries.

Or if you want to look at this way, no country, this is public debt.

And this is interest payments a share of GDP. And the slope of this curve is the interest rate.

So here you have Japan. It has a huge debt but at a very very low interest rate right.

While Brazil Turkey have a much smaller that but a much higher interest rate.

So the reason why countries in and have trouble borrowing is not because they have too much debt, but because the debt is more expensive.

Okay. So now you feel completely satisfied with that answer.

Right. Yes or no.

So I've convinced you. I found the answer.

Yes. I'm going to wait for him.

Yes. No. Because, um, the fact that it's the interest rate itself is a reflection of the credit ratings.

We've kind of on some circular logic here.

You are? That's what I was. Thank you. Thank you. You saved your cohort.

I'm being completely circular. Completely circular.

I'm asking myself why the interest rates are. Why are interest rates high in developing countries?

And I'm answering it because interest rates are high in developing countries.

And because interest rates are high in developing countries, they have trouble servicing their debt because interest rates are high.

But why are interest rates high? Okay, so the plot thickens further.

Good. So. And.

So I'm going to assume I'm going to develop a little model of fiscal risk okay.

And the model is a m is going to start with this variable here x okay.

It's this interest burden as a share of tax revenues, which I'm going to assume is a stochastic variable.

So X is going to have an expected value and a standard deviation around that expected value.

Okay. Um, now I'm going to assume that if X goes above a certain X bar level,

countries are going to have enormous pain in servicing their debt and they're going to rather default.

Okay. A little bit like, you know, the way they analyze mortgage lending, they ask, you know, what's your monthly income.

And they want to know what's the interest burden or the as a share of your monthly income.

And up above a certain threshold, they think it's too heavy.

They're not going to be able to pay. Okay. So so I'm going to have a model.

Just two equations. The first equation is the one I already presented.

It's x is by definition the interest burden as a share of tax revenue.

That's my first equation. My second equation is going to come from an assumption that, um investors are risk neutral and they are buying.

They have the option of buying a risk free bond that has a rate of return.

Wrong. Okay. Um, they can buy your bond and your bond has an rate of return, ie,

which is going to make them indifferent between buying your bond or buying the risk free.

Okay. Now it just so happens. That you are going to pay the interest rate with probability.

Say bye. Okay.

But with probability one minus pi you're going to pay zero.

So for Rome, the risk free rate to be equal to I pi plus zero times one minus pi.

So this goes to zero, right? I has to equal rho divided by the probability that you pay.

Okay. And the probability that you pay is the probability that x doesn't get higher than a certain x bar.

Okay. So the interest rate is compensating investors for the risk that you might not pay.

If the probability that you pay is one, you pay the risk free rate.

If the probability that you pay is less than one, you're going to pay more than the risk free rate,

because that means this probability is less than one and it's in the denominator.

Rabin. Good. So that's it.

That's it. You find those two assumptions. One is just the definition.

The other one kind of makes sense right. Okay.

Now remember that x is the probability that x is below x bar is is is is a probability over a distribution of x.

This is the stochastic variable that is going to have a distribution.

So if X has this distribution and this is x bar, there is no part of the distribution that goes above x bar.

So the probability that you pay is one. But if X has this distribution, it's a much faster distribution.

Then there's this probability here that you default.

Okay. So suddenly volatility is going to matter for risk premium.

Ramani going to that okay.

So we're going to solve this model in the space of the interest rate Vis-a-vis this variable x.

Okay, I'm going to put some stuff here. The first thing I'm going to put is I'm going to put the risk free rate.

That's the risk free rate. Okay. The second thing I'm going to put is this x bar at which you know, you don't pay.

Okay. So the next thing I'm going to put is my first equation.

And my first equation is this equation here. That is just the definition of x.

Since I'm solving it for a space in which this is x and this is I,

then it's just x equals d over t y I, which means that it's a rate starting from the origin.

It has no intercept right. Which has a slope equal to the debt to tax revenue ratio.

Robin Hood. All right.

The other equation is interesting because if if if x is very low, the probability that x goes above x bar is zero.

So the probability that you pay is one. So you pay the risk free rate.

But if x is very high then you are not going to pay.

So the probability that you pay is zero. So the interest rate necessarily to compensate is the fact that you're not going to pay anything.

It has to go to infinity. So it's going to be something like that.

All right. Simple.

Simple. Barebones. Now notice that this has something that economists always worry about.

What do they worry about? They worry about. You know the model having the curves cross twice.

Because there's means that there's an equilibrium here, that if the interest rate is low, then X is low.

But if X is low, then the interest rate is low. But if the interest rate is low, X is long right.

But if x is high then the interest rate should be high.

But if the interest rate is high then x is high. So this is multiple equilibrium.

Okay. So which goes to my argument before, why is the interest rate high in in Latin America?

Because that service is high, X is high. And why is X high in Latin America?

Because the interest rate is high. Okay. That's kind of like this bad equilibrium here.

Now a. Your country.

So here Mexico is a country right next to the US.

And here Mexico is a country right next to Guatemala. Right.

Both are equilibria. So one day you look like the US.

When they look like what they're Marla. Right. Both are equilibria okay.

This might also explain why if you have these multiple equilibria and a guy like Mario Draghi comes out and says, Matthias, what did Mario Draghi say?

Three words. Whatever it takes, whatever it takes.

So the market got scared. You know these countries that are known as the pigs.

You know who the pigs are. Right. Portugal, Italy, Greece and Spain.

Right. So they say, you know, the German investors say, oh, these are all Latinos.

They are irresponsible. So but then come Mario Draghi and says whatever it takes us having boom interest rates come here.

Whatever it takes. So it's multiple equilibria. If you are able to coordinate the market in the good equilibrium, everybody's happy.

Because if interest rates are low then that service is low.

And if that service is low they're in high risk. So interest rates should be low.

Right now this model has also ehm other potential equilibria.

This one is that, you know, there's no bad equilibrium.

There's only good equilibrium. Right. So this is a country that never goal is never at risk of problems.

But this is a country that is bankrupt, that there is no combination of interest rate and x that that match.

So there's no market. You're out of the market.

There's no equilibrium. There's no market. Okay, so you see, with a super simple, simple model you get a lot of rich outcomes, rich results.

Good. So suppose we have a country like this one that's sort of like a fragile country.

It's a country that, you know, has a good equilibrium, has a bad equilibrium.

You know, it's, uh, it's fragile.

I'm going to compare it with another country that's just more volatile.

If a country were more volatile, how would I graph that country in this space?

You know, all of these questions have to do with I have to shift the curve.

Okay. So what is the curve? That depends on the volatility of x.

Well it's definitely not this curve. The volatility of X does not come in.

But the volatility of x comes in the denominator here right.

Because the more volatile. The x it means the fatter this distribution the more of the tail is going to be on the other side of the X right.

So if. If I have a country that has a higher X.

Then this curve is going to shift out. And if it shifts out this way, it's a bankrupt country.

There's no longer a place where, you know, there's a market.

So this model has the possibility of multiple equilibria because if interest rates are high, X is high.

And if X is high, interest rate should be high. And if X is low, if interest rates are low, X is low, and if X is low, interest rates are low.

Keep us all. So not as I don't know.

The question is what what makes ex volatile. Okay.

So what would make ex volatile. First let's look at the denominator.

Maybe you know GDP is volatile. And so tax revenues are volatile.

And we know that developing countries are more volatile than industrialized countries on average.

So we already have a more volatile ex. Okay.

And this is GDP per capita.

This is the standard deviation of GDP. And this is a standard deviation of government revenues okay.

So you see all the rich countries have very low volatility of these things.

And these countries have humongous volatility right.

Multiples of volatility right. So it's volatility.

Call it you know something around two or less than two. And this is you know ten eight six or multiples.

And this is call it I don't know three.

And this is. Ten, 20, 30, 49 so much, many orders of magnitude bigger volatility.

So the volatility of these things is going to matter.

Now we have a model that would explain why volatility would matter before interest rates okay.

But I'm going to introduce something that's going to be just a hypothesis here.

And I hope to have enough time to tell you more about it. Yes.

Or question. Sorry. Um you know like on Tuesday we discussed the issue between the starboard side of the VHF, the GDP or the euro.

Right. And in this case, the GDP growth.

In this case, the radio shows GDP or GDP growth.

This is standard deviation of GDP growth. But in the data X.

Well I mean it's something that's going to make uh, the GDP growth is going to make the obviously it's going to translate into a volatility of GDP.

Right. But the standard deviation excludes average growth because it's going to be the growth minus the mean of growth which is average growth.

So it's going to count only the deviations from trend.

Good. So now I'm going to introduce.

A the original sin hypothesis.

And the original sin hypothesis simply says that some countries when they borrow abroad,

they have to denominate their obligation in dollars or in some foreign currency that when they borrow abroad,

they don't issued that in pesos, a local currency.

Huh? Why? Because they said so.

Okay, so just a fact of life.

I'm going to elaborate on that fact of life later on.

Okay. And so you cannot borrow abroad in your own currency.

Now, if in addition, for reasons that will become more obvious next Thursday,

you do not have long term fixed that markets in local currency and most countries have debt markets that are very short in duration.

Right. So there's very little long term damage.

And it's going to be related to the fact that the longer the debt, the more uncertainty you have as to what's going to happen between here and there,

and the higher the interest rate that they want to charge you and they want to charge you such a high interest rate that you don't want to issue that.

At that rate, you'd rather take the risk, the rollover risk.

Okay. So you're condemned to choose between the short term debt in pesos and long term, potentially longer term debt in dollars.

Okay. If that were the case then your X becomes like this.

Now, I know that this looks a little bit ominous, but it's really trivial.

It says you have a stock of debt at the beginning of the year.

T minus one to say December 31st. S stands for short.

So this is your stock of short term debt that you are going to pay an interest rate.

That is going to be repriced several times during the year. You're standing on December 31st looking at the year ahead.

You don't know what interest rate you're going to pay on that debt.

Okay. The second stock of that is the stock of long term debt in local currency.

Okay. So t minus one means you're standing at t minus one.

You know all the variables at t minus one. So here you have no uncertainty.

You know everything. You know how much debt you have issued and at what interest rate you've issued the debt.

You have it okay. And then this term is your long term dollar debt and your long term dollar that was issued in the past.

So you know, this variable out of interest rate, fixed rate.

You know that variable.

But you just don't know the exchange rate that you'll have to at which you are going to have to buy the foreign exchange to service.

That, that. Okay. So now in order for you to service that, there's going to be not only volatile revenues, which I showed you were very volatile,

but on top of it, there's going to be volatility in the short term interest rate and volatility in the exchange rate.

Now, since we are going to talk about foreign debt, let's think about volatility in the exchange rate.

Okay. Now one way to capture those.

The logic of the volatility in the exchange rate is that you want to ask you know I don't know if you remember your high school algebra.

But if you wanted to put this exchange rate in the denominator how would you do that.

Mhm. I'm not blind to it.

I scared you so much that you have lost your knowledge of algebra.

Multiply and divide by right. You want to put this below this denominator, right?

So it wouldn't be, would it? I can either multiply the numerator by e or divide the denominator by right.

But if I divide the denominator by e is sort of like y t divided by e, that's what is that.

That's GDP measured in U.S. dollars.

So another way to think about it. If you're servicing debt in dollars out of a GDP, what's the value of your GDP in dollars.

Because you're going to service that in dollars with the value of your GDP in dollars.

So why don't we measure the GDP in dollars. Why don't we measure the volatility of GDP as measured in dollars.

Okay. So in.

This is the standard deviation of real GDP growth.

And this is a standard deviation of your GDP measured in U.S. dollars.

And the blue line is the 45 degree line. So what does this tell you.

This tells you that the volatility of your GDP, measured in U.S. dollars, is much bigger than the volatility of your GDP.

Um, okay. So.

A. And this is.

This is the ratio of the volatility of your GDP in dollars relative to the volatility of your GDP at constant prices.

And since the volatility of your GDP in dollars is no.

Two, four, six, eight times, almost ten times the volatility of your real GDP.

So it's going to make your, uh, the base with which you're going to try to service that, that that much more volatile.

Okay. So for the same numbers I showed you before and this example, the volatility of industrialized countries is 2.7% in real terms.

Suppose they borrow only in local currencies. So the exchange rate doesn't come in to the relevant volatility.

But compare that to a country that would borrow in in dollar terms.

Well then it would be perceived as much more volatile.

Okay. And in particular GDP in dollars tends to collapse in bad times.

So here I put the biggest collapse in GDP in dollars.

And I show you here what happened to actual GDP. So I don't know.

In Vietnam GDP and GDP fell 82.8% between 87 and 89.

But actual real GDP was growing. Uh, you know, even there's no case in which this number is smaller than this number.

Okay. So on average, you know, in all of these crises that I've identified in, dollars fell 55% in real GDP, only from 12 in back in crisis.

Yeah. So again,

also the problem here is that like the world is like seeing the currency of this country that's just like not strong enough or not trustable.

Well, they say because I don't trust you, I'm going to lend you in dollars.

But it says when I'm assessing your risk, I have to ask myself your capacity to service dollar debt.

And for that, I want to know the value of your GDP measured in U.S. dollars.

But it just so happens that your exchange rate moves and it tends to weaken in bad times.

So in bad times, not only does your real GDP decline, your dollar GDP declines by multiples of the decline in the real GDP.

Okay. And I already showed you last lecture that the real exchange rate is much more volatile in developing countries.

So. This comes from a paper I did with, um, Roberto Rico on a for the world Bank Group,

where we were trying to convince them that they should land in CPI,

index, local currency debt to their to their countries because lending in dollars dumps a lot of risk to the borrowing country.

You say you know you're supposed to be trying to help these countries.

Why don't you lend to them in CPI index terms instead of lending to them in dollars?

And so the CPI index in Chile is called what?

What WiFi. Um, yeah. From Intel.

So that's why we titled the paper I got enough.

No. So and so actually made it to this lecture today.

And it's going to make it to the lecture on on Tuesday also.

So I should read a little bit.

But you see that because the exchange rate is so much more volatile than, than real GDP.

Um, this is what would happen to the debt to GDP ratio if you started at 55% and you just let the economy be shocked by standard shocks over a decade?

Yes. So two questions. First, if you can go back to the, um, slide before or this one, the um, the difference between real GDP and uh,

GDP in dollars is GDP is one conversion rate only change with inflation and GDP in dollars is you put two conversion rates with two.

Okay. That's on the show. Uh, second question, I think it's kind of an agent's problem because, um,

the country have a very good incentive to print money and assume impact counts for money.

Much of this, um, difference. And why does a central bank of a country should be an institution within the realm of the country?

If we'd have, like IMF, central banks or something like these outside from the government,

it doesn't impact at all by these countries would be much safer.

And it's very property to some extent.

So I'm going to go there, especially next Thursday.

Okay. When we talk monetary policy about them, and I will get to you in a few minutes.

But but your logic, um, resonates with something, but with some caveats.

Thanks. So. And so why are why do countries get into trouble at levels of debt that are manageable for other countries now?

Kind of like it's obvious the debt to GDP ratio is not important.

That tax revenue ratio is not determinant. It's everything determined on this underlying volatility in your capacity to spend in your capacity to pay.

And that has to do with the exchange rate, with short term interest rate and so on.

And typically in these countries, bad times are characterized by low GDP, a depreciated currency and high interest rates.

So bad things tend to happen together. So in bad times your ex shoots up, making you suddenly, if you were perceived as relatively stable,

you now look horrible in the middle of a crisis, right?

So the reason why that is, it's because debt structure makes exchange rates and short term interest rates matter for debt service.

And these variables are not only volatile, they also are correlated in the wrong way.

It's not that, you know, in in bad times Jeep goes down, but interest rates also go down.

So one compensates the other.

No, in bad times, GDP goes down and interest rates go up and the exchange rate goes up and everything moves in the wrong direction in bad times.

And then in good times, they are moving in the good way.

And now you look super great.

Okay, so why are countries trapped in a pro cyclical response to shocks is because their capacity to borrow in bad times is very limited.

So they borrow when they can and they can borrow in good times.

So you know, so you borrow it's a little bit like the game of skin diving.

You know, your skin diving. You're going underwater without a tank right.

So you have to wait until your next chance to get your head out of the water to breathe.

So when finally you have you head out and breathing a lot, so you borrow in good times.

And then in bad times you're underwater. You cannot borrow. Yes.

Um, like for the countries with like high volatility,

it's impossible for them to increase their fortunes or a good time so that they can come off of a real depreciation in the back time.

What do you do in good times? Just to increase foreign reserves.

Forex foreign exchange reserves? Yes.

So then in good times, you get your head out of the water, you borrow a lot and you keep it in reserve.

You don't spend the money so that you have pre borrowed for bad times.

So you a precautionary borrow.

So your you remain super liquid to be able to self insure against future shocks.

And that's what we're going to see in a couple of slides. Why countries tend to have much higher levels of of reserves than rich countries okay.

So you know sometimes it's important for you to go long term in your debt and your domestic debt.

But typically many countries cannot go long term in their domestic that because people fear that that

will give the government an incentive to inflate that the way right will reduce the value of that,

that through inflation. So in order to tell them, don't worry about that, I'm going to if I do that, I'm compensating you for it.

Then you might want to sell index that where the index is to, to the price index or CPI index.

Right. In that case A you go to to to index that.

And that's what Chile did for a very long time before they were able to issue long term nominal debt.

Okay. So. Uh, and so you might want to think that, you know, debts are not equal,

that we are just adding the dollar value of that or the peso value of debts, but each type of that carries with it a different risk.

In banking, we use risk weights for different kinds of loans.

Maybe in debt we should do the same thing. So.

So that's what I wanted to say about some of the financial reasons why countries are vulnerable.

Yes. Right. Isn't one of the problems of countries with a high interest rate?

If the international community doesn't uncover statistics like they would a controversial CPI index, because they might change it.

For different purposes. Well, everybody trusted the CPI index until the Argentinians came along.

And then they sort of like stole something like $15 billion in debt by lying about the price index that gave that gave a very bad name to,

to those price indices. I just tried to make it clear, even in Israel, which is developed countries, um,

we had problems of like the finance minister who try to impact how and the Bureau of Statistics change the index.

It was 1% change to here and there. But like I assume that smaller countries has a huge incentive to make it to bigger.

Yeah. So that's, uh, an important consideration of how credible is your price index calculation.

And and as Stalin famously said, what matters is not who votes but who counts the votes.

Right. So, um, so this is a regression where on the y axis you have the credit rating and the, the dependent variable is the credit rating.

And, and and controlling for GDP per capita, debt to GDP ratio and the external debt to GDP ratio and so on.

And you see that the debt to GDP ratio comes in a little bit.

But the bigger explanation is original sin okay.

And original sin say in these regressions, uh, laws were between 4 and 5 notches of credit ratings.

So if you go from zero original sin, you borrow in local currency to one in original sandwiches,

you only bar one dollars, uh, for the same level of income, same debt to GDP ratio, same everything.

You you pay a hefty cost. Okay.

So what, um, what is this original sin business?

Yet in the end, the term I coined this term in a paper in 1998, than we did a second paper with Eichengreen in 1999.

As a situation in which the domestic currency is not used to borrow abroad.

Okay. Now, in it you might ask yourself, why did we call it original sin?

Because the original sin is a theory of why women give birth with pain, and why men work with the sweat of their brow.

Right. Because. In the Bible it says that because Adam and Eve committed this original sin, the punishment was we were kicked out of Paradise.

And those two things men have to work with a bracket, with the sweat of their brow, and women have to give birth with pain.

That's in the Bible. Catholic theologians defined that as the original sin, fall from grace,

etc. so we are asking ourselves, why the [INAUDIBLE] are countries suffering from these pains?

And the answer that this theory gives is somebody ate an apple.

I didn't eat an apple. You didn't eat an apple. Somebody ate an apple.

And because of that, we have to suffer this pain.

What the [INAUDIBLE] is that? Apple. Why why why is there so much pain?

And the apple happened to be this technical thing that, gee, when you borrow broad,

you don't denominate your debt in local currency, you denominated debt in foreign currency.

And that is enough to generate help. That's the reason why you're not in Paradise.

Why are we not in Paradise? Because of this technicality.

Okay, that was the origin of the term. No original sin has declined marginally in in a few countries.

So we wrote a book and then two updates to the calculations and so on.

In this book, we keeping the religious terminology.

We had a chapter called The Pain of Original Sin, which is, you know, what are the consequences of original sin?

Another one on the causes of original sin, which we called the Mystery of Original sin.

And the third one on policy solutions that we called redemption from original sin.

Okay. Right. So aim aim is a.

So the first argument, Roy, would have been the reason why they don't lend to you in local currency is because they don't trust you.

They think you're going to inflate away the thing. So maybe it has to do with average inflation.

So here in these regressions I put original sin as the dependent variable.

And I'm trying to explain original sin. And here I put my average inflation a maximum inflation the volatility of inflation.

Inflation nothing. And that's not because high inflation countries can borrow and borrow local currency.

It's because there are too many low inflation countries that cannot borrow on local currency.

We put a bunch of other things. So this is the way the data looks okay.

This original sin. There's just too many countries here that have full original sin with very low inflation.

So inflation doesn't do the work. And we put, you know, fiscal solvency.

So that to GDP ratio, debt to tax revenue ratio whatever you borrow.

Nothing nothing nothing. The only thing that consistently across all of the things come it comes in is size.

If you're big they lend you in your currency.

If you're small, they don't. It doesn't matter if you are, you know, Monaco or you know, whatever.

It's your size matters. And they suggested to us that the problem was more of a network problem in the financial architecture of the world.

That is, if you are a Korean investor and you want to invest in Brazil.

There are no direct flights between Korea and Brazil.

You have to go through JFK. Right.

So you have to convert from Korean Wong to dollars and then from dollars to three hours.

And when you want to get back, you have to learn from reals to dollars and from dollars back to one.

So your transaction costs get multiplied by the fact that there are very few bilateral markets.

If you look at most countries, there is only a liquid market for pesos to dollars.

There might be a smaller market of pesos to euros, but that's it.

So it's really about something about the nature of the financial architecture of the world.

Nothing to do with things you have done yourself.

Okay. So that's our our explanation there in.

And. On the pain of original sin.

What we found out? Yes. Uh, given that, uh, lately, um, China has increased a lot of freedom and influence.

There's a lot of countries. The main partner is China, the US.

Why? Countries are still borrowing in, in, uh, um, well, in, in dollars and not in, like, in the currency of their main trade partner.

It wouldn't matter. It's not important. The currency of your main trade partner.

The point is that it's not your currency.

Because if it were your currency, you know, maybe your currency strengthens in good times and weakens in bad times.

But in good times, if it strengthens, you have to pay more.

But that's okay, because it's good times. And in bad times your your currency would weaken.

And then you have to pay in real terms less because you know you have less money, you have to pay less.

So it would be correlated in the correct way with your capacity to pay.

But if it's with in euros and in Chinese renminbi or in, it doesn't change the picture.

So China also lends in foreign currency if they don't lend in local currency.

So what we find is that if you have original sin, you have what they call fear of floating.

You don't let the exchange rate move too much. And the reason why you don't let the exchange rate move too much is because

saying you want to use monetary policy as a stimulus as for for macro mana,

for aggregate demand management. You want to lower the interest rate than bad times.

You want to raise the interest rate in good times, right? But if you lower the interest rate, the exchange rate tends to weaken.

And if the exchange rate weakens the dollar value, the value of their debt goes up.

It becomes harder for you to service the debt. Right.

And it becomes a harder for your companies that have borrowed abroad to service their debt.

So expansionary monetary policy can actually be contractionary.

A reduction in interest rates might actually make people worse off.

Through this balance sheet effect on the dollar. That's okay.

And that's why they don't let the exchange rate fluctuate too much.

So this is. And on the on the dependent variable, we have some measure of exchange rate flexibility to let the exchange rate fluctuate.

And depending on your, you know, GDP or external debt or whatever, original sin seems to matter a lot.

Okay. So there's a lot of impact of original sin on your willingness to let the exchange rate float.

So a there's also a original sin tends to limit your ability to run countercyclical policies.

Um, and as a consequence you end up getting more volatility.

This is the volatility for GDP growth. This is a volatility of capital flows is a volatility of what is this volatility.

Uh this is dropping financial centers. Um in.

A of your um uh GDP and of your capital flow volatility.

And the argument is original sin is a major determinant of how volatile you are.

So if you suffer from original sin and you have borrowed abroad,

your chances of being very volatile go up because of the nature of your structure of that.

Um, so fiscal policy may be prosecutorial because governments lose access to finance in bad times and regain it in good times.

So they borrow in good times because they can and not in bad times because they can.

This is because deaths are either long term in dollars or short term in local currencies.

This makes ex dependent on the short term interest rate and on the exchange rate, and these tend to have the wrong correlation with a business cycle.

So amplifying everything. So they go up in bad times and they go down in good times.

Having dollar denominated that. That has important implications for the ability of a country to stabilize against shocks.

If you can't borrow in your own currency, you shouldn't be borrowing too much.

And and you may want to demand a much higher level of international reserve so that you can use them as self-insurance.

This is not a first, best solution of not borrowing and holding a lot of reserves.

These sound like inefficiencies sound, but you know, things are second best at best.

So this makes me a very prudent from a fiscal point of view,

because I think that the risks of carrying dollar denominated debts are quite significant.

Let me stop there and see if you have any comments, questions, remarks.

Yes. The response to the world Bank proposal that you said to give the loans and local currency.

Was there any response from the bank? That's it.

So we started by suggesting that we do it with either because I doubt it, because the typical argument is we have to lend in dollars,

because we borrowed in dollars, and we want to match our liabilities to our assets.

So that means in some sense you're dumping that risk on your, of your borrowers, right.

But then it became fashionable to say, no, you know, I should be give grants not loans.

And we say, okay, why don't you do it with your ordinary capital loans?

They say no because, you know, we don't want to hold the exchange rate press.

