[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
If I said. For long.

Hey, guys. Uh. Yes I appreciate.

You for taking. So that was really cool.

That's so cool. You know, honestly, it's fine.

I think it's too much. Well, it's probably 160.

So, you know, for us here in town within a matter of weeks.

Huh? Yeah. I'll be there for, like, six hours.

Thank you. I'm sorry. No, wait. I can give.

Him all of that. Yeah, it would be helpful. Okay.

It is very good. So today we're going to have, uh.

You want to think about it as, uh, a positive theory of fiscal policy?

Okay, that is not what fiscal policy should be, but what fiscal policy is in practice.

Okay. So before we get there, let me do some housekeeping.

Problem set five on Micro Diagnostics is due November 26th.

And this week you'll have a review session on Thursday and the lecture on Friday.

Okay. Good. So, uh, we know that, um, fiscal policy, uh, should be proceed.

Click on that is, um, it should be anti cyclical in theory whether you are a Keynesian or um,

or um, neo Ricardian economist or whatever a it should be.

And they cyclical in the sense that both times you said why didn't we are deficit in good times we should shorten it.

This is a sample of of Latin American recessions, um, and OECD recessions.

And you see, we did this in the last lecture.

Uh, the red bars are much bigger on the right than on the left, meaning that volatility of GDP in Latin America is much bigger than the OECD,

but that these green bars, which is what happened to the deficit,

they move with the red bars A and typically are larger than the red bars of GDP falls by one.

The fiscal deficit falls by more than one, uh, in uh, in uh, upper middle income countries we see more of that.

But in a lower low middle income countries we don't see that.

So for some reason they are not, um, they cyclical for some reason they have trouble accessing financial markets.

Not all the time. Remember, sometimes Mexico looks like a country right next to us, and the next day it looks right next to what they might write on.

And it has, uh, typically, uh, an electoral budget cycle that for some reason, in elections, deficits widen.

Um, okay. So the question is why do developed countries face, uh, precarious access to borrowing?

We discussed that last week. And maybe it's not because they borrow too much, but because they borrow in dollars.

And this generates all sorts of bad cyclical dynamics, right?

That in bad times, um, the exchange rate weakens.

And if you're debt is in dollars, then it's more expensive to service that, that in bad times and that in fact,

the depreciation of the, of the exchange rate in bad times is bigger than the fall in actual revenue.

Right. So is this change in relative prices that makes that, um, hard to hard to pay.

And then, uh, you might try to prevent the exchange rate from depreciation by jacking up interest rates,

but then you have to pay more on your short term debt. Okay.

Um, we also have the question of, uh, uh, and not just why can't you borrow, but why are you cyclical?

They may be related. You may be you don't borrow in bad times because you can't.

Maybe you borrow in good times because that's the only time you can. So.

Huh. And why is there an electoral budget cycle?

And can you design institutions around these issues? So.

In this lecture, I'm going to try to look again at these questions.

But from the point of view of the behavior of agents around fiscal policy.

And a fiscal policy is going to suffer from several problems.

One problem, one kind of problem. I will describe these problems in more detail later on this just introductory.

If you have coordination problems in a common food problem that has kind of like

two versions of a static common pool problem and a dynamic common pool problem,

then I'll elaborate. Then you have the problem of aggregation.

How do you go from individual preferences to social preferences?

Because fiscal policy is in principle decided collectively.

How they how do you go from what people want, from what individuals want to the aggregate?

Okay. And you have agency problems and you have time inconsistency problems.

So these are four kinds of problems that are going to a um, potentially explain some of the weird aspects of fiscal policy.

Okay. So these are our are four for four problems.

So the first problem is a common pool problem. The way I like to explain the common pool problem.

And I hope this is a memorable metaphor. All the metaphors have something to do with animals.

So this is called the chicken and lobster problem. Okay, you go to a restaurant with nine friends.

There are two dishes on the menu. One is chicken for $10 and one is lobster for $50.

If each one is going to pay their bill independently.

And considering that you are graduate students with.

Constraint cash flows. You choose chicken, right?

Now, if you're going to share the bill, there are two possible scenarios.

And one scenario is everybody else chooses chicken.

So for you if you chose lobster it will be nine times ten is 90 plus your lobster 50.

That's 140 divided by ten. That's 14. So actually you could buy chicken for $10 or lobster for $14.

Now maybe for $14. You know lobster is worth it, but maybe you're not the first one to choose.

Maybe you are the last one to choose. So suppose everybody else has chosen lobster.

Now you have nine times 50%.

That's 450 plus your chicken. That's $10 460 divided by ten.

That's 46. So you can have chicken for $46 or lobster for $50.

Okay. So if you chose independently, you would have chosen chicken.

But now in this strategic game, you're better off choosing lobster because you could have it either if everybody else chooses a lobster.

You have your chicken for $46, and who's going to pay $46 for a chicken, right?

And if everybody else chooses chicken, you can have lobster for $14.

Who would not have lobster for $14, right? So the point is that when you choose things collectively, you may choose different fee.

And when you choose things as an individual. Okay.

Now, fiscal policy is the process of paying collectively for things.

So, you know, you might want, you know, Boston might want the Big Dig, right, about the Big Dig.

You know, if it's paid by the federal government that's paid by everybody else.

So it's not that you have to internalize the cost of the, you know, you know, the taxes that you would pay for the Big Dig and so on.

So. So the idea is that there's going to be concentrated benefits of spending while and that are going to be paid from a common resource.

So the budget is this process of choosing collectively.

If you are a minister of health, you're not going to internalize the problem of the taxes that you would need to raise, etc.

But because you, as a minister of health are going to be judged by your health performance and so on,

not by the implicit cost of, of um, of the taxes to everybody else.

If you're spending money, if you're legislator, you know, you bring a bridge to your town, right?

You're not internalizing the tax cost of bringing a bridge to your town, because that's shared with everybody else in the country, right?

So for that reason, there's going to be a tendency to overspend and over borrow.

Okay. So this is the first claim because there's a common pool problem.

There's going to be a tendency to overspend. That means that somehow you have to impose a budget constraint somehow on a game that wants to overspend.

So that's if you want a static common pool problem.

A more dynamic version is the following.

Suppose you are, say, a Venezuelan minister of economy.

Just suppose and suppose there is an oil boom.

And the oil boom is associated in. Actually, this actual history of oil boom is associated with the fact that in some Hussein invaded Kuwait and,

you know, the U.S. is going to kick out Saddam Hussein from Kuwait.

Oil prices skyrocket. But you realize Saddam Hussein is not going to beat the U.S. and the international coalition.

This is going to be a temporary shock. So what does the theory say for temporary shocks?

Saving you. You save them, right?

You should save them because you know you should save them.

Because. If you start spending them next year, you'll have to cut back because a temporary shark.

So you just, you know, like you save it, you incorporate the permanent component and maybe you just spend a little bit.

Right. So everybody read the the, um, um, uh, the econ 101, uh, version of the problem.

And so we know we should say we agree that we should save the temporary wall.

Now, suppose you are a the president of the teachers union, and, uh, Bernadette is the president of the of the, uh, police union.

Suddenly. Ehm, eh?

Bernadette is thinking, you know,

I have an upcoming collective bargaining agreement and right now the Minister of Finance is full of money because of the temporary shock.

He says he wants to save it, but savings is kind of like postponed.

Chicken and egg problem. Chicken and lobster problem. Right?

It's kind of like an undefined property, right? On both savings.

She says I have the following problem. If I go on strike now.

The minister has money.

If I don't go on strike now, maybe them this the union, the education, the teachers union goes on strike and they take all the money.

So let me take the teacher's union money before they take my money.

Right. So we all agree that the first best is that we all save, etc.

But I'd rather do the savings myself, right?

I'd rather use this occasion to grab the money before somebody else grabs it.

Okay. So if you put this in a dynamic game, it makes it makes kind of counter-cyclical thinking a little bit harder because it this

undefined property rights in the static problem and you don't know who owns the common pool.

It becomes an undefined problem on undefined property rights, on temporary savings.

Right. And that may lead to a tendency for pro cyclical spending.

Is that clear? Okay.

So. So that means that we might explain in some sense that the outcome of the physical game is going to have some funny features.

Because of its common pool nature. Okay, so then there are agency problems.

Can anybody define for me what is an agency problem or a principal agent problem.

Yes. Why don't you explain to the group. That the agent is representing a principal, but not always acting disinterested.

Or, you know, the principle of a principal. Know like you cannot deviate from their duties.

Okay. So you have a problem of what they call in this literature.

Delegate the choice. Right. Oops.

So you you're saying I'm a very busy person?

I am, uh, I don't know, I'm a medical doctor.

I benefit from all of these public goods, but that's the business of the government.

So I'm going to delegate on the government the choice of running the government for on my behalf.

So I'm the principal. The government is the agent or the president says I'm a very busy person.

And, you know, I cannot be running around every ministry.

So I'm going to appoint the Minister of Health, and the Minister of Health is going to take care of that.

Right.

So there's in each one of these situations, you have a principal who's has to make some choices, but he's too busy or she's too busy to make choices,

delegate those choices to somebody else in principle, that somebody else should be choosing as if they were the president,

or as if they were a the medical doctor that is delegating on the government.

But the truth is that this delegate, that agents are going to have some objective function,

some preferences that may not be the same as the preferences of the principal.

So, as Juan Pablo said, they might deviate from the preferences of the principal.

If if the principal could perfectly observe what was happening, then immediately, instantaneously,

the moment they make a choice that differs from the choice they would have made, they call him up.

But in order for the principal agent problem to be real, there has to be asymmetric information.

That is, you set up the whole problem because there is asymmetric information, because you are too busy to deal with the minutia of that decision.

So you delegate on somebody who's going to spend the time processing all the informations and

the costs and benefits and etc. of decisions and choices that you don't have the time to do.

And because of that, they have more information than you have on what are the elements of the choice.

And they can always hide behind the fact that they have more information than you have, so they can use that information asymmetry to their advantage.

Okay. So those are kind of like the building blocks of a principal agent class.

And so here you can have some of the some of the distortions that the agency generates.

The government may want to spend more money than the public would have spent because either they can appropriate part of it,

maybe because if they spend more money now,

the economy will be apparently doing better now, and they will get the political benefits of an economy that is,

you know, happy today, maybe sorrow tomorrow, but tomorrow is a is another day, right?

And because of that, and the principal knows that they cannot really trust the agent too much.

So there's going to be a problem of lack of confidence on the, on the, on the agent right by the principal.

And, and the agent is going to have incentives to distort reality through policy.

So. One of the things that the agent can do is they can distort in the economy by organizing an electoral economic boom.

So by organizing an economic boom that's going to peak at the time of elections.

So if it's time of elections, you want to go full with government spending, generate the mini boom around the election.

And because people don't know exactly what's happening.

They have to they say this might be an artificial boom or this might be the consequence of a very effective government.

So they they don't there's this noisy signal.

Is this an artificial boom or is this a very effective government?

Well, the idea is that if if it's a noisy signal, there is some signal.

And maybe given that the economy is booming and you don't know the cause, you will update upwards your perception that the government is effective.

But maybe there is some probability that they're just playing games, but maybe there's a probability they're actually effective.

Okay. So this, um, in the initial paper by Nordhaus in 1975, it was before the the rational expectations revolution.

So Rogoff in 1990 wrote a paper with rational expectations.

But with this asymmetric information and and in rational expectations,

you still would vote the government because of this, uh, this, this noisy signal that you're observing.

But there is you're assuming that there's some signal in the signal.

It's not pure. So that's.

Then. Okay, so that's the, um. Uh, the second problem.

The agency problem. The third problem is, uh, credibility or timing consistency problem.

That one has, uh, a Venezuelan version.

I don't know if this is, uh, an international version, but the Venezuelan version says you don't know who's more stupid,

the person who lends a book or the person who returns it.

Right. Because why would you lend a book if they're not going to return it?

And why would you return the book if they already lent it to you?

Right. So so this is the problem of future promises.

Okay. Today, before you give me the book, I'm willing to promise anything, right?

Because I really want to read that book. But now that you have given the book and now I have the book, now my incentives to return it are changed.

I promised to return it before you gave me the book.

But now a I regret having promised it to you.

I was actually crossing my fingers in the back or something. Right? You know, so on.

So what promises do governments do about the future?

Well, they do promises about that. Right.

And with that aim.

You are saying, gee, you know, lend me the money today.

Lend me the money today. I'll pay it for you for sure tomorrow. But tomorrow comes and you say, gee, I regret having made that promise.

I'd rather keep the money than pay it back. Okay.

So bondholders.

Are thinking, is this government actually going to pay me back or not?

Hey. They're wondering. And one way in which these and for example, this paper for example, is, is very nice.

It says, okay, let's embed this in what they call a signaling problem.

Now who can remind me? Signaling sounds like something that I think I would have explained to NPR ads.

Am I wrong? Right? Yes. Juan Pablo seems to be the only one who remembers.

I'm not on NPR. Oh, maybe that's the reason you. Stunningly dumb.

Yeah. Okay, so maybe that would be how you guys take note if you want to really study anytime.

So the signaling ring a bell?

It rings a slight bell, but you cannot recall it.

There's Alzheimer's seeping in or something. Anybody can tell me what signaling is.

I think it would be something like you signal that you have certain virtues.

A certain amount of credibility through some other action could increase your credibility.

And then, for example.

Okay. Yes. Right. I, for example, going to Harvard to signal that you are able to do things.

I thought I thought that this is such an obvious example that you would have all come up.

You want to do exactly that, that this course 309 is completely useless.

You already know that. But you're just signaling that you took it so that a future employer might think, gee,

this guy, you know, this person really, really must be tough or something, you know?

And he's not afraid of long and homework assignment.

Okay, I'll give you a better example. Go ahead.

In biology, there is something called a handicap principle that it's used to explain why peacocks has this huge tail.

They basically say, and have quite interesting math behind it, that if a peacock can defend itself while carrying this huge tail,

it means that he they are able to they have good genes and they're able to protect, uh, whatever they need and so on.

So I think that's a very interesting idea. Yeah. So so you, you do something that.

It's a very good point. You do something that is actually costly to you.

I don't know if you've noticed that a degree at the Kennedy School is not cheap, but so it's something that is costly to you, but that you do it.

And because you are trapped in this informational asymmetry problem, it's again, it's an informational asymmetry.

So the way we think about this, and at least in this model, is there are two possible types of government.

There is the dry government and there's the wet government.

The wet government is it likes to spend and and doesn't like to pay its debts.

And the dry government is more austere and so on.

So you can think of the bondholder as wondering, is this guy who's selling the debt?

Is he dry or is he wet? So now you are the banks.

You're the government. And you say, how can I tell the bondholders that I'm actually dry and not wet?

Well, I have to do something that is costly to me, but it would be super costly to a wet person, to a wet government.

So what can a government do that is costly to the government?

But it would be really costly if the government were wet.

And that would be, for example, like. Making a massive deficit cut to cut the deficit.

For example, suppose there is there is a temporary recession, and we all understand that the first best of a temporary recession is that you funded.

You borrow against it. That's we all agree that we have that's the first pass.

But if we're trapped in this asymmetric information problem, there are bondholders don't don't know if if I'm a dry government that is going about,

uh, as what econ 101 tells it to do or whether it's actually a wet government.

So what what a what government do they would borrow in bad times?

So what how can you differentiate yourself from a dry from a wet government?

Well, you might borrow not borrow in bad times or borrow much less in bad times.

So you show that you know you are austere and you borrow much less.

So you actually under borrow as a signal that you're dry.

Okay. So, so, uh, the this, um, credibility problem would a translate itself into, um, cyclicality.

Right that the first best would have been anti cyclicality,

but in bad times you would look like a wet government or you under borrowing

in in bad times because you want to convince bondholders that you're serious.

Okay. So, um, we have three kinds of, ehm, diseases that I started the lecture with.

One is that, you know, you may borrow too much. One is that your response may be parasitical.

And one is that you might have an electoral budget cycle. So.

A coordination problems might lead to both a deficit bias.

Because you know we all want lobster. And it may lead to a pro cyclical response because bear in our debt is afraid

that somebody will take the money that's in in the ministry before she does.

Right. And so on. So the commitment problem would explain.

A why countries respond positively to bad shocks.

It's that they fear that the commitment is credibility.

They fear that markets are not going to trust them as they borrow in bad times, because they might interpret that they're a wet government.

And so and so in their inability to commit to future sustainable policies, leads to poor access to finance in bad times.

And the electoral budget cycle is more of an agency problem here.

Risk of being out of office accelerate spending agents, for example.

Executive may have incentives to expand fiscally during election years of being in office.

Okay. But also in in election time, a, you know, if you're the Minister of Finance, you cannot say, um, buy my bonds.

And I promise that in the future, a I'm going to adopt such and such policies.

Because it's an election year and the market doesn't know who's going to be there in the future.

So the closer you are to the elections, the less you can promise about your future actions.

And that may mean election times being very troublesome.

Not necessarily.

So a in a, you know, country risk might go up in election times because you don't know if if the lunatic fringe is going to win the election or not.

So I remember, for example, in 2002 there were elections in Brazil.

And here, ehm, everybody thought that, uh, you know, Fernando Enrique Cardoso, he was the president.

He could not be reelected. It was the second term, had done a spectacular job with a real plan A, and brought inflation down to single digits,

etc. he couldn't get reelected, but everybody thought that his party would get reelected after such a good performance.

Uh, I think the elections in Brazil are in October.

If anybody from Brazil can contradict me, we don't have anybody from Brazil, thankfully, so no one will control me.

But and then the change of government is in January.

So sometime in July, August, the polls starting to come out saying that Lula,

which was this super leftwing party at the time that had never been in power, was leading in the polls.

Well, markets went crazy. Country rates went through the roof, and the only way to calm markets was to call the IMF for a program.

And the IMF said, okay, there are we are now in the month of July, I can give you a program for four months.

But that's not going to solve the problem because people are going to see forward.

So I'm going to give you a program for two years. But Lula has to sign on to a program.

Right. And so they actually got Lula signature on the program in Congress of Lula's party to signal that policy is going forward.

We're going to be reasonable. And actually, Lula's first period and he stayed in government for two periods, his first year, his first period.

He was very responsible, macro economically and in some sense because he realized that if he misbehaved.

Country risk would go up, the exchange rate would weaken, and so on.

And so. Irresponsible things would get punished overnight by the markets and good statements would get rewarded overnight by markets.

So so markets sometimes discipline governments anyway.

So so you see that these different kinds of problems.

So for example the agency problem might explain why there's a deficit bias.

Because the agent is the government. The government doesn't care that much about future debt they're going to be around.

Is anybody paying attention? Yeah. You're all looking at your machines.

Oh, okay. Then there are electoral rules.

And the electoral rules are really, really arbitrary.

So, for example, how was the 2000 election decided in the US?

Quote unquote part, quote unquote, the court.

But what happened before the court? Anything.

Some issue in Florida with some boats. Um, but I can't recall.

Actually, it was a Republican administration that that decided that certain votes would be considered as valid and invalid.

And that kind of swung the election in one way. You remember how many votes?

Huh? 500. Yeah, something like 425 votes.

So al Gore won the popular vote by millions, and he lost Florida by 425 votes and 425 votes in Florida.

Determine who the president was. Okay, so.

So why is that? Because the US uses this electoral college.

We've just gone through the election. We know how it works. It means that, um, you know, in in Massachusetts, uh, Kamala Harris got 67% of the vote.

Um, if she had gotten 50.1% of the votes, you'd still would have gotten the same number of Electoral College votes.

Okay, so there's weird ways in which you aggregate preferences.

So, for example, a the new the new, uh, prime minister of Britain has, I think,

one of the largest majorities, if not the largest majority, uh, ever in, in the British Parliament.

What percentage of the vote did he get? 54.

30. 34. Huh? Okay, as in Spanish, you would say.

You say 30. I say 32. Yeah, well, he got more in the 40s, but.

So, uh. That has no translation, but.

So he has a humongous majority in Congress, in Parliament, but with a minority of votes.

Why is that? Coalition people votes in districts.

It's first past the post. It's first past the post.

It's first past the post. It means that I know in Britain you have three parties.

So, um, it's just whoever comes first in that jurisdiction because you elect one member of Congress per jurisdiction.

If it was proportional representation, then perfect proportional representation like there is, for example, in the Colombian Senate.

Or there is in Israel, there's perfect proportional representation to a first approximation.

Then it's in Israel you have 120 seats, so you get 60% of the votes.

You're going to get 60% of the seats. If you get 5% of votes, you get 5% of the seats.

But to do that, you have to have elect more than one person per jurisdiction.

Right. So it can't be one that we like one person.

So how many?

Not how many people vote in a district, but how many people are going to get elected in a district is what they called district magnitude.

The district magnitude first past the post means the district magnitude is one.

You elect only one person and you cannot make proportional representation with one.

But maybe you elect three people or seven people, but then you have to have semi proportional representation with three or with seven,

which is not going to be as as precise as when you are electing 100 senators, right then Columbia down to 102 or 120.

In Israel you can be more more precise in your representation.

No. So one important variable we are going to ask is what is the district magnitude in your Congress?

In the U.S., it's one proportional representation systems have more than one.

And so there are going to be costs and benefits of going from first past the post to proportional representation and so on.

First past the post means whoever has the largest minority gets the whole thing like just happened in the UK.

You are a minority. You're you're not, you know, the preferred option of the majority of the voters,

but there's a plurality of voters that are sufficiently homogeneous and so on.

So you get almost all of the seats okay.

If you apply that in, uh, in a place and that has some the conflicts, it means that whoever is in the minority has essentially no voice.

And so for them, it might be that you'd rather be in the hills than be and shooting to people then be playing the political game.

So if you want to be more inclusive, you want proportional representation.

And that means increasing district magnitude, allocating the seats more proportionally.

But then you have a parliament that has a harder time making decisions.

Okay. So you're more inclusive in one direction, but you are um, you have more difficult, uh, and decision making processes.

Now, these these rules are going to generate incentives that are going to express themselves in how many parties do you have.

So in. A if you have a more first past the post system, if you are the third party, you are sure to get zero everywhere.

So suppose there is a fight between, say, the traditional Republicans and the MAGA Republicans.

In a proportional representation system, they will split and each one will take their share of the votes to Congress.

But in our first past the post system, if you split and you are not the majority of the, uh, of of the party, you're going to get nothing.

So you have no incentive to split. That's going to reduce the number of effective parties and with fewer expected effective parties in Congress.

By the way, the word effective parties, the word effective is, um, mathematically meaningful term.

Um, it's actually the inverse of the her harassment personal index.

Let me. Let me explain. If you have.

The Hirshman index is you take this.

The shares that say each something gets income here votes whatever.

You square them. Okay.

The shares add up to one, but the square of the shares doesn't add up to one.

And then we're going to get one over that. Okay. So for example, if you have two parties and each party gets 50% of the votes,

then it's you would say intuitively it's as if you have two parties, right?

But 50% of the vote means one party gets.

Gets 50% of the vote square. That's 25.

The other one gets 50 for that square, that's 25, 25 plus 25 is 51.

Over point five is two. Okay.

But if you have one party gets 99% of the vote and the other party gets 1% of the vote, it 99 squared is 0.9 98 or something.

Oh, and the other one squared is 0.01. So it's point 99 one over point 99 is 1.01 parties.

So if one gets 99% of them. So it's as if you had one party okay.

So effective numbers are I'm in love with effective numbers.

And I love to calculate the effective number of products a country exports, the effective number of industries,

effective number of locations in which an industry is located may be more meaningful than that then ubiquity.

And we're playing around with that. All right. So anyway so and then you have a question.

If you have one chamber you have two chambers. So it's a it's a complicated story, you know.

So let me show you these are a district magnitudes in Latin America okay.

So Brazil it's very proportional representation Mexico has very proportional representation on average.

And every district in the lower house you get some 19 people elected in Brazil per.

This is so when you vote you vote for uh, slate in in Mexico it's more like 17.

And in these countries Haiti, Barbados, Trinidad, Bahamas, it's first past the post, one is first past the post.

Okay. So this is a nice way of making it more more continuous.

And the thing is that more representation, more first past the post.

This is district magnitude. And this is effective number of parties in Congress.

So more proportional representation leads to more parties.

That's a rule. How many parties in the Colombian Congress?

35. Uh 2525.

Okay. How many now in Chile? 2222 and this is a recent phenomenon that used to be four.

Right. And you went you made some changes to your electoral rules.

And in no time it went from 4 to 22. Okay. And how many in India the huge number of parties.

But I think you have something called a national party is when you reach a certain scale.

And that's only 6 to 7 all over India.

How many? 6278627, 1.6 billion people, 1.4 billion people.

So it's not in the number of people you have. And there are difference in preferences.

It's in your electoral process.

You have first past the post after those groups and as a consequence become the larger the effective number of parties,

the lower the representation of the President in Congress.

So it's more likely that you have a minority president.

And as a consequence, it's more likely that you have larger deficits.

So Italy has more proportional representation that has larger deficits.

It may be also because they're Italian or maybe because they're Italian.

They have proportional representation. But there is a clear association between proportional representation and deficit.

Yes. Uh, what you just discussed, Peter. And.

This paper is from the 90s. And you have larger debts.

What is a council mechanism of this like? Right.

Proportional representation brings some other more chicken and lobster problems.

Mhm. There is more more of a common pool problem.

There are more people who would not internalize the cost of their bridge.

So I'm looking to have very low deficits because he had a big majority in Parliament.

If you are in Italy and you have a bunch of parties in the coalition and you have to please all parties,

it's going to be harder to impose a harder budget constraint. Also more difficult to raise taxes.

But you yeah. And for some reason there's more cyclicality in the response.

So there's there's a relationship between these political variables and how fiscal policy ends up performance.

So I'm encouraging you to think about. The political institutions of your country and think about what it means for the ability to run fiscal policy.

Really, don't you expect? Um, he's very said democracy.

And there is no difference between more parties or more interesting third party people,

because the congressmen from this district would expect this, much less if it was another party in the quality seats in the same party.

It's an interesting question in South Africa how to effectively one party in the first time.

They don't get a majority if they have proportional representation.

But we have essentially, you know,

the African National Congress was the largest party and in addition wasn't with a coalition with the Communist Party and with some other party.

So everybody was in the coalition. They had an enormous difficulty of making decisions because all the social conflicts were inside the party.

So. Oh, wow. So, so there was a lot of gridlock, in spite of the fact that there was one party.

So. Okay. So now I can go to your country and say, you know,

you have to change your Constitution because the Constitution says that this is the way you elect your people,

but that's going to lead to large deficits in large debt.

So you have to change your constitution, and people are going to correctly took you out of the room and say.

We have much bigger fish to fry. There are these serious problems here, right?

Serious problems, political problems that we need to address.

We are trying to optimize on a much larger board, fiscal deficit, etc.

You know, that's a more technical issue or more something issue.

We will deal with it through some other means, but we're not going to, uh, choose our electoral system based on its fiscal consequences.

Okay. So if that's the case and if you have a other objectives.

And only one and one instrument. You have horrible trade offs.

So you wish there was another instrument that you could use to run a fiscal policy or another policy instrument.

And that other policy instrument is what we call budget institutions.

So budget institutions is the rules of the game. They're the rules of the game under which the different actors play a role.

And so they define a how is the fiscal policy game going to be played.

Okay. And these fiscal um, uh, these budget rules, um, come of of three types of rules.

You have either numerical rules. So it just says, you know, there's a balanced budget.

And 49 of the 50 US states have balanced budget rules.

So the rule is deficit is zero, period.

Okay. Um, you can have procedural rules and you can have rules that affect the transparency of the budget.

Okay. So these are three kinds of rules. And so you have balanced budget rules such as the US.

You have the Maastricht criteria that says that fiscal deficits cannot be more than 3% of GDP, and debt to GDP ratios cannot be more than 60% of GDP.

And they approved it in a nice town in the Netherlands called Maastricht.

And. And it's a very nice town. But no one paid attention to the road because no one has deficits less than 3% of GDP.

And everybody and their brother have debt to GDP ratio is above 60% of GDP.

So it didn't pay. Okay. Then you have the Grand Rudman and Hollings Act in the US, which was really interesting.

Ehm. They agreed on a multi year.

I think it was a seven year program to lower the US deficit and uh, every year they would plan a deficit and that was according to the law.

And every year the deficit, instead of going down according to the law and went up.

But they abided by the law because the law said that the planned budget has to have that.

So they were just cheating on the way the budget was calculated.

And so the Office of Management and Budget had the responsibility of of calculating the budget.

They knew that they had this legal constraint.

So they fiddled around with the estimated taxes and the estimated cost of, of, uh, entitlement programs and so on.

So that they've ex-ante abided by the law, but ex-post, when the results came in,

they had violated the law, but the law was on the ex-ante budget, not on the ex-post budget.

So that gives you an idea of how you can cheat on these things.

And that's the reason why eventually Congress got tired and they took away the power of the OMB to estimate the budget,

and they gave it to the Congressional Budget Office. Okay.

So and okay, so numerical rules are going to differ in different ways on the indicator of performance on the legal rank of the norm.

If the, uh, if the if the numerical target is a law, it's there by law.

Well guess what. The budget is also a law. So if you all have a majority to pass a budget, you have a majority to change the target.

Um, regarding their coverage, for example, is it only for the central government?

Is it for the consolidated government?

Is it?

Because if it's only for the central government, you should create some institutions outside of the central government and run the deficit there.

All right. So. So regarding the stage of the budget process where they apply.

So for example does they. Do they apply to the ex ante budget, the ex post budget etc.

So these are a bunch of of of details. Um.

Numerical rules, if they are enforced.

May may solve some problems. They may impose a harder budget constraint.

They may limit your ability to use the budget than electoral times.

They may solve the chicken and lobster problem because it says, you know, you can choose chicken or lobster, but the total has to be 100, right?

And you can only buy two lobsters for 100.

So. But they'll generate incentives or creative accounting.

They will limit your possibility to act in in an anti cyclical way.

They tend to be inflexible and so on and so on.

And so in general they don't have a very good aim.

I mean they have worked in the US actually the US has balanced budget rules and that has forced states to have rainy day funds.

So they save in good times, put it in the rainy day and in bad years they use money from the rainy day funds, but they don't run a deficit.

And so then there are procedural rules.

And these procedural rules differ in whether we have more hierarchical rules that

concentrate power on fiscal matters or more collegial rules that share power.

And this these things are happened both within the government and between government and Congress.

So in under so first days, as you draft the budget, first question is who has the power to draft the budget?

By the way, let me say Chile is an extreme country in terms of hierarchical.

Okay. A chili has a lot of power of the Ministry of Finance, income in the government,

a lot of power of the executive Vis-a-vis Congress and a lot of power of the central government over the regional and local governments.

It's at an extreme there, if you want Brazil or Argentina or at the other extreme, I wonder,

I think India has a rather weak control by the federal government over the state government.

So there's a lot of autonomy at the state government now.

But spending they have some rules and act, and they've been following the states because they have the Finance Commission.

So recently they were able to control at least the spending part on this part.

Okay.

So so it's interesting, I wrote a paper once in the early 2000, a on on on this issue for India, but I'm glad to hear that they've changed the rules.

And actually this agenda goes into changing the rules. So in so a more a more collegial approach would be, you know, um,

spending ministers draft their own budget and they try to aggregate the budgets and negotiate with a finance minister.

This is especially the case if you have a coalition government where different parties control different different than the ministries,

they are going to be unwilling to give too much power to the finance ministry.

An exception to this is a little bit Israel, where you have many parties in the cabinet, but the finance minister is still very strong.

It depends mostly on his all political power and these relationships with the Prime Minister.

So during the approval process, the question is what modifications can Congress put to the budget?

So, for example, in Chile's extreme case, I don't know if they've changed these rules,

but historically the Congress could only in a not approve spending programs.

Congress could not reallocate spending. So they would either accept the spending programs of the government or cut some of them off.

But they could not say, I'm going to cut this and not to this other one according to the rules.

Secondly, and most importantly, if Congress could not agree on a budget, then the proposal of the government becomes law.

That's Chile and the US. If they don't approve the budget, the government shuts down, right?

So you see it because the government shutdown, then Congress has a lot of power over the Congress know.

And then the question is who's going to be blamed for shutting down the government, etc. in Chile?

You know, either you agree with me or I win, you know, so it's it's a lot of power.

I think that that one has been revised. Now it's still it's still the same.

Um, but uh, today there is uh, the department, the members of Parliament has inveighed.

Um, I think the, the attributions over constitutionally, I mean,

they're not there's more negotiation because they don't respect the Constitution and because they're the Congress.

So anyway, so so it gives you an idea of what are the dimensions on which this game depends.

Okay. And then during budget implementation, a more hierarchical rule would say a Congress has authorized spending.

And the question is, okay, Congress has authorized me to spend.

It does not force me to spend. If I need to cut the budget, I cut the budget.

I can't. More because I have not been authorized, but I can cut the budget in the US.

The executive cannot cut the budget. This is what the college is calling the USA line item veto or and they're good reasons.

So in Latin America in general, the budget is an authorization to spend in the US.

It's an obligation to spend. Okay.

And this is going to matter if you're in a bad time and you have to cut the deficit, well, you can always cut the deficit.

You may have to ask Congress for, you know, or you might need to inform Congress that you're cutting the deficit.

And in the US, the argument is that if, if if the budget was not an obligation to spend,

then negotiations in Congress would break down because they would say, you know, I'm willing to pass your law if you build me this bridge.

But then if you have the discretion not to build me the bridge, then I have no way of negotiating with you.

So actually, for the US political game, it's important that the budget be an obligation to spend and not just an authorization to spend.

So anyway, so we and um, so there are some reasons why you might think that these budget rules might generate more fiscal discipline.

They may solve the common pool problem. They because you are empowering the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Finance realizes

that he has to go out and borrow and understands that capital markets might not accompany you.

So so you are empowering the agent that has most incentives for discipline.

But a it's not going to solve the electoral budget cycle because all the players want to win the election.

And. It's not going to solve other problems.

So let me tell you about a paper I wrote with Alberto Alsina and Rudy Holmes and others.

We asked countries to answer these questions about a, you know,

are there legal constraints on the budget and is there a finance minister has greater authority over spending budgetary issues than other ministers?

What powers does Congress have to amend the budget?

Um, what happens if Congress does not approve the budget?

In it, can the budget mean modified after approval by Who's initiative, etc.?

So sea level would be at one extreme and and the US would be at the other extreme.

Are you and what are the limits on borrowing?

Um, um, can subnational governments borrow independently?

Can they borrow at all in Chile? They can't borrow at all.

In other places, they can only borrow with authorization of of the Finance Commission.

So that's the trick that is being used in India and so on. So we calculated this index for Latin American countries.

And then we played around with it. And and here we have the better budget.

Institutions lead to smaller deficits that better budget institutions lead to lower debt.

That better budget institutions don't lead to more anti cyclical policies.

So it doesn't solve the cyclicality problem and it doesn't solve the electoral and budget electoral deficit problems electoral cycle.

So uh so that's a um a that's um, that's what I wanted to say about budget institutions.

So I don't know if your countries have a deficit problem, have a fiscal problem, Argentinians.

And whenever they do, uh, growth diagnostic of Argentina, they always say the problem in Argentina is fiscal and and the fiscal problem is,

you know, it's because of their, you know, because of something like this.

So this lecture becomes a very important lecture for them. Um, in each country is is different.

And I want you to be thinking about does your country have a fiscal problem?

What kind of fiscal problem does it have? And does it have anything to do either with its constitutional arrangement or with its budget institutions?

I wanted to say yes. How often are this budget like fiscal problem?

That is the binding constraint. That's a signature binding constraint for a country.

Unless the country is in fiscal crisis, most are or many are.

So, um, obviously it's going to be, uh, a, I mean, it's top of mind in, in Ethiopia.

And we're going to talk more about monetary policy in Ethiopia on, on Friday, maybe with classes are on Friday.

Um. A review session on Thursday this week.

Um, so. Hey, Amy, it's, uh, it's it's, uh, dominant problem in Venezuela.

So it's a it's the problem in, uh, in Lebanon.

So I don't know, every time you go to a place, don't assume it's very easy for countries to get in trouble for fiscal reasons.

Colombia. It's unlikely to be the budget constraint, uh, the binding constraint, because Colombia has very strong budget institutions.

They have a fiscal rule. By the way, this whole literature led to a change in the fiscal rules in Latin America.

And many countries adopted ehm, fiscal responsibility rules and so on.

So now it's less of a problem in in many Latin American countries.

Now, the problem the political debate in, in Colombia is are they going to abide by the rules or not abide by the rules.

That's this one. And decentralization is socially right.

Decentralization is another issue that's related to this problem.

Because if you thought you had a chicken and lobster problem at the national level,

multiplied by the number of of states and municipalities, you can you have.

No, there has I'm going to argue and I'm going to be short on this.

I'm going to argue that there's five dimensions of fiscal decentralization.

Okay. Um. Most countries have a structure that is not changing every, every so often they change the rules.

So for example, Nigeria is a country that has moved to a much more federal structure.

The American general has moved to a more federal structure.

Chile, for the first time, now has elected governors in Chile with such a centralist ehm constitution that they don't want the regional identities.

So they didn't give names to their regions, they just gave numbers.

So region one, region two. So. So who can fall in love with number five or number?

How many regions do we have? Uh 16. 16 region.

So 16. Right. So so I don't know if now you're going to change, you're going to give the names.

I have to say that that those are related because, uh, during the military dictatorship,

the guys that redraw the country, but people in the Navy, so they follow what they have for like the novel souls.

So first novels, so second. So that, uh, yes.

Thank you. Like, actually one, two, three, four, five.

I got so right now because they are naming them because as they're creating new ones,

you can start with one and then you get to 15 and then to the two.

So because of this organize it. Right now we are naming them and and like trying to to not to just so them so in fear that they

might develop a sense of us and you know being so Chile's this narrow and super long country.

So you can imagine that. Climate topography everything changes a lot.

Vegetation. So you they might you may want to separate.

So those let's keep them all together. And they the governors were appointed by the president.

And now for the first time they have elected governor. So a little power.

No. Huh. Uh, I'm very little power. No power. Yeah. That's exactly what this slide is about.

When you think about power, I want you to think about five dimensions.

And these are very important. Five dimensions of decentralization.

Israel is too small to have states, but it has municipalities.

So still this is important. And so first question is the power to elect.

Can you choose the god the authorities and what do you choose?

Or do they have an assembly? We have, uh, two chambers.

What do they have? Right. We have a governor. You have the vote for the governor.

Do you vote for the mayor? Yeah. Uh, so Chile just gave the power to elect the governor to two voters.

Second is the power to spend. And what? That is the question.

What are you responsible for? Are you responsible for education, for health, for or is health, uh, national thing?

Are you responsible for for collecting the garbage or is that a municipal thing?

Are you responsible for water or is that, uh, no.

Are you responsible for electricity? For example, the lunatics in, in, in, uh, in South Africa gave municipalities a the responsibility to.

Distribute electricity. So they have 300 municipalities.

So you have 300 electricity distribution companies. Why make it difficult if you can make it impossible.

So yeah. So the power to spend.

The third one is the power to tax. And this power is typically very constrained because for efficiency reasons,

if you want that in the distortion free effects of a tax have to do with how much does the base move when you move the tax rate.

Right. So in an extreme elastic base, if you try to tax it a little bit, it goes all the way.

So you can't raise revenue.

But the idea is that tax bases have a much easier time to move between one municipality and another than to move out of a country.

So that's that's the reason why you want to have national taxation.

But if you have national taxation, then these municipalities or these regional governments, how are they going to collect money?

So there's a trade off between between how much you allow them to tax and how responsible you want them to pay and to be on the spending side.

Then there is the power to borrow. And the question is, are you delegating them the ability to borrow?

And again, Sheila, here is the extreme case. She wouldn't let them even have credit cards.

Right. Because that would imply a debt and so on. So so no ability to borrow at the subnational level.

In Argentina and Brazil, it's the opposite.

It's that, for example, the rich states of Brazil feel that they are contributing too much to the federal government.

So the way they get even is they would run these large deficits default.

And be bailed out by the federal government. So bailouts were the way of getting your money back.

So you say you you you you overspend irresponsibly.

And and then the government finds it super complicated to have a defaulting large state like Sao Paulo or Rio.

And so they would go out and bail them out.

And in the end these guys would reverse kind of like a redistribution policy that was shut down through a change in their,

ehm, fiscal responsibility laws. So the power to borrow in meeting was telling us that that's constrained in the Indian system.

Right. And then because of all of these constraints, you need to have a system of intergovernmental transfers.

And there's enormous variety in the way you generate your system of intergovernmental transfers.

So for example. In and I'm sorry to be.

I'm usually quite the international, but this one,

I'm being a little bit too Latin American because it's it's the part of the world where I know more about this subject.

But in, in, in, not in America, a a like in Colombia, there is this you call it a sequel vehicle?

I think. So there are some rules on how much of the current income of the government has to go to where, and the rule is in the law.

It may be adjusted with the census and population over every decade or so, but for years the average of every four years, every four years.

But there are some rules. You just get money in Chile.

A they are more like a fee for service.

That is. How many children do you have? Here is the money for schools.

Right. So, um. So, um.

In. So, um, what this is.

So there's been a growing number of elected municipal governments in Latin America.

It was going up over, over the years. Uh, now, let me see.

This is how much revenue decentralization there is and this is how much expenditure decentralization there is.

This is a 45 degree line.

So you see, in all countries of the world, there's more expenditure decentralization than revenue decentralization for the regions.

Reasons I explained before when we worked on South Africa.

South Africa is the country that has the most expenditure, um, decentralization for its level of revenue.

Decentralization. Yeah. Given the amount of revenues.

So only 15% of revenues are collected by subnational governments, but 50% of expenditures are done by subnational governments.

So there's a lot of. Now this this vertical imbalance is going to generate.

Oops. It's going to generate. Um. Uh, um, a bit of a common pool problem because if, if regions don't, don't have the money to spend,

they're all going to gang up against the federal government for more money.

Right. And they are expecting to be bailed out now in in South Africa.

The revenue sharing is quite redistributive.

So, uh, this is this is, uh, these are the former homelands, though, um, and these are this is the amount of fiscal transfers that they get.

So you see that the poorer regions get much, much more money. And the other regions, there's a lot of these decentralization of spending.

One important question is, are these.

