[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
There's. It's not that.

We're not doing. I'm sorry. Oh, yeah.

Your job. All right. Um. And I think it's for the whole job.

Yeah. Which is what? I'm doing.

Oh. That's great. I. Think that would be true.

I think I am. Yes, sir. I'm sorry. I'm sorry if I.

Had so much to do, because. I wanted to ask.

You. I wish you.

Tell us about this.

It's. Just a few months.

Ago, I was be.

On the purchase again? Huh?

Well, if we don't make sure.

It's just not for the personal.

Reasons. Oh, my know.

It's like. I.

Don't know this guy. And I realize that I don't like.

Basketball. Oh, I think it's okay.

Hey. Good morning everyone. This is our second class.

Um, going to be doing some early announcements.

Um, first the first problem set is up. Um, I would recommend everyone take a look at it.

Uh, the objective of this problem set is for you to get familiarized with, uh, because they said we're going to be using in the course.

Um, so just curiously, you know, toggle through it and see what variables are in the data set and what can you do with it.

Um, and it's going to be pretty straightforward, but we're going to have, uh, office hours, um, available if anyone has any questions.

Um, complete the, uh, getting to know your survey by the end of today.

Um, we want to have the results ready to show you guys next class.

Um, and the first review session will be this Friday.

So anyone panicking a little bit about the problem said com and Friday, uh, review sessions are you usually have new content.

Um, so they're not mandatory, but, you know, it should really come with you.

Uh, but they are mandatory when I teach on Friday. Yeah. So 2 or 3 times during the semester, we're going to have Ricardo teaching on a Friday.

So have that space open in your in your schedule. Um, and our office hours.

Well, mine were yesterday and next Monday, but Johan has office hours on Wednesdays and Fridays, uh, from 12 to 1 p.m.

That's a typo. Um, so this Wednesday and Friday at 12.

Uh, you can go to your and, um, if you click on the link below.

Um. Um, if you click on the link below, uh, you can start submitting your groups.

And if you're trying to find a group, um, you can go and post on slack or, um, you can put your name here.

Uh, and try to see who has a three person group and with, uh, interesting country.

That's. All right. So today we're going to talk about Malthusian economics.

And then a, I must say that the I kind of discovered, rediscovered Malthus personally in 2005 visiting Bihar in India.

So I'll tell you the story later on. But, uh, um, a you know,

Malthus was probably the unluckiest economy economist in history in the sense that he uncovered

a model that explained millennia of human history just in time for the world to change on him.

Right. So, so, um, a, you know, the underpinnings of the model suddenly disappeared in the subsequent century.

But the logic of, of of his model was really, uh, you know, powerful.

And his work actually was super influential in the 19th century.

Uh, Charles Darwin, he cites him, you know, profusely because he last class,

we figured out that something must explain why we are not up to our ears in the bacteria.

Right, because equally, bacteria have the capacity to replicate.

Right. So something must be checking that. Right.

And humans have the capacity to replicate that.

And we saw it with Adam and Eve. So something must be checking that.

Right. So things have the capacity to grow beyond what, you know, ecologists would call the carrying capacity of the environment.

If you ask yourself what determines a population of elephants?

Or what determines a population of tigers, or what determines a population of squirrels,

you know they have the capacity to to grow like equally bacteria a little bit slower, right?

Why are we not up to our ears in them? Right. So something must be checking the process.

So, um. Why why does this matter?

Well, if you look at human history, this is a population of the world in millions.

Uh, now, apparently from the year 10,000 B.C., there was probably around 4 million humans, and they grew over 10,000 years to 170 million.

Now, from 4 to 170 million. Over 10,000 years.

That's just the rate of growth of 0.04%. So that's almost zero growth.

So but it's sufficiently long time for it to uh.

And then you have this, this very, you know, this acceleration of, of population growth worldwide from 0.1%, 2.58% and then to above 1% only recently.

Right. Uh, this is a, um, a in the in the century between 19, the 120 years between 1800 and 1920, it grew by less than 1%.

So these rates of 1% are only seen in, uh, in the 20th century.

Okay. And that's more or less how it looks. Um, I mean, it's quite impressive.

It took, uh, it took, um, what is this, 32 years to go from, to add 1 billion people, and it took 15 years to add another billion.

Then it took 12 years to add another billion. Right. So, so, but for a very, very long time, population growth rates were really, really low.

So why the [INAUDIBLE]. So something must have been checking environment because by the way in this time a births per woman were probably above six.

So how do you get zero population growth with birth for women above six?

Huh? Yeah. Hi. Child mortality rates.

Yeah, well, somebody must be dying, right? So there must be a lot of churn in the population.

Right. So. Yeah, absolutely. So when we see GDP per capita, it has sort of like the same shape.

And you would imagine, gee, this is kind of weird because I would have expected that if now a population accelerated,

then it would be hard for GDP per capita to grow because there are more people right to.

And now we know that the rate of population growth worldwide is declining, and it's declining,

in part because fertility rates globally are declining and they're now globally not too far from replacement rates.

Which is about 2.1%. Now you might say, okay, but why?

Why should we care about this, these long term processes?

Let me give you the short answer. The short answer is that these demographic processes are very slow.

They take they happen across generations.

And so the structure of the population today in the countries you might be looking at are

going to reflect sort of like the time since a the Malthusian trap has stopped operating.

And I'll show you some tricks about how to know where your country is and what does it imply for your country today.

So while this is going to talk about history, my concern is how can you transform it into a time of diagnostic today?

Okay. So we also know that what happened in the last 200 years is that in this period in which, you know,

global income started to rise, that this happened differentially in some parts, in others.

So one possible explanation or interpretation is that these guys escape the Malthusian trap, and these didn't.

So Malthus might be alive and kicking over here while he might have, you know, passed away over there.

Okay. So the story of the escape from the Earth, who's going to drop a mic might not be over.

So a first question.

That the model tries to explain is why were incomes mostly stable for so long around subsistence levels?

Now, mouth's used language that we're going to, uh, translate a little bit, but he used a bit confusing language.

You said population grows geometrically, so it's an exponential, and agriculture grows arithmetically.

Doesn't make too much sense because it's also an exponential.

It's just a different exponential, um, or a lower exponential.

But in any case, the point is that your ability to have E coli bacteria or children or rabbits for that matter,

exceeds the current capacity of the environment. Okay.

And so population growth will outpace food production until population stabilizes at something that checks the level of of population.

Okay. And that's what he called the iron law of wages. So and it's the reason.

So he was in some sense really thinking that he was explaining population growth.

He was not explaining income per capita growth because there was no income per capita growth to be explained.

It was not kind of like the question. Okay.

And in. A now given what we know happened later to population growth, we can ask ourselves why was population growth so low for so long?

Why do you think population growth was so low for so long? Yes, Mohammed.

Uh, I think, uh, because of, uh, economic development and society, uh, rationale that the norms related to family size have changed.

That's why didn't work. So it was it was about social norms restricting fertility, uh, having the number of families, reducing the size of family.

And sort of like the age of marriage or something. If you believe the age of marriage from.

Yeah, I think mainly the economy has been stuck in agricultural base until you ran out of like spaces or arable land.

And at that point chicks out of the population. That's number one.

But, you know, the US has seen a reduction in the labor force in going to agriculture.

The share of the labor force going to agriculture. But you haven't seen a reduction in agricultural output.

That's productivity has gone up. Uh huh.

So yes, one, uh, I would say that, uh, food production is not the only factor that allows the population to survive over time,

like also improving conditions or having better life from being in cities like increases your book.

Put your microphone on. Uh, I do I repeat what I said.

Uh uh, I wanted to say that food production is not the only factor that increases the likelihood of population surviving.

Uh, we can also think about medical advances.

So my question is, why was population growth so low for so long?

I think they didn't have that like the carrying capacity of the environment.

Do you think how old those factories that on the overpass there.

Well other factors that condition us down.

Uh, I would say probably.

Uh, what about technology like of, of, uh, increasing their volume that maybe disable the increase in population growth?

Okay. So I like that. So if there had been productivity growth, there would have been more population growth.

So it must be that there was very low rate of growth of productivity in agriculture.

Okay. So the model is going to be super simple.

I'm going to reduce it to to the minimum.

On the one hand I'm going to have this space here where there's birth rates death rates and income per capita.

Okay. And and the idea is that a if you have higher incomes you survive.

You know, if you have lower income, say, if you have a drought in Ethiopia, you don't survive.

Right? So income means more resources with which to survive.

The higher the resources you have, the less likely you are to die. Okay.

So a declining area of death rates is I mean, income.

And and maybe you have, uh, a rising birth rate with income.

Oh, and part of it is biological.

When you are starving, the first thing that happens to a woman's body is that it shuts down its reproductive capacity to save energy and so on.

So in. So maybe the birth rates are upward sloping.

And that means that if you are to the right of a certain income, per capita population grows.

If you are to the left of some income, per capita population falls.

Okay. Now we're going to see that this logic doesn't translate well to the present,

because as I said in a slide in the first lecture, uh, the rich get rich and the poor get children, right?

So anyway. The second piece of the argument is that most people are in agriculture and in agriculture.

The amount of output you can generate on a fixed amount of land.

Declines with a marginal product declines with labor inputs because you have a fixed factor.

So we have a declining marginal utility, marginal productivity of labor and agriculture.

So you have uh uh downward sloping curve in this graph okay.

So the higher the income, the higher the population, the more people try to live off the same stock of land,

whether you are a hunter gatherer or an agriculturalist.

Um, um, this is kind of like the carrying capacity of the environment idea, right?

Now, interestingly, this model, as simple as it is, it's going to lead to an equilibrium.

Ending in the equilibrium means that there is going to be a level of income in which population stagnates.

If population, if you're at this higher level of income, then birth rates exceed death rates, population grows.

And as population grows, we return to the equilibrium point. If income per capita is too low, people die.

Population declines unless population declines, income per capita goes up.

Okay. So that's the essence of the model right now.

And the model predicts that population will go to an equilibrium level in which

population does not grow and at sufficiently low level of income per capita.

That assures that. So this is the only law of wages.

And that's the reason why Malthus is not because of Malthus.

We are called the dismal science. Right. So and it's going to be very dismal.

Is that so? In a couple of examples. So let me do some comparative statics in the model.

Um, the first question is what would happen if there was a green revolution that made agriculture more productive.

So you know, you are Bill gates. You say all the development problems are about technology.

We need to fund, you know, a new green revolution.

There was already one, right? So let's do a green revolution.

What are the equilibrium outcomes? Yes.

And efflorescence of population. Until there are so many people that GDP per capita goes all the way back down to where we started.

So? So the prediction would be that you won't get development, that you will get population growth.

Right. So let me let me do this.

You know, smart people can figure things out. Others use models.

Okay. So you know.

A if you a if you are asked the question in economics, you always ask yourself in your head, what is the model and what is the curve that moved?

Okay. What is the curve that moved in the comparative static?

Okay, so if you tell me that there was an agricultural revolution, a green revolution, which is the curve that's going to move.

They performed well in capitals everywhere.

Uh, the lower line. The lower line? The lower line would move to the right.

Good. So the lower line would move to the right. What will happen?

Well, um, you know, you will get higher incomes per capita, but at that,

higher income per capita population will grow until you get back to the original level of income, but with more population.

So. Under these this mechanism a, you know, uh, a green revolution is not going to to do it.

So, you know, so now that the, um, Bill gates has been chastened, maybe Bill gates will have another idea.

Um. Um, so.

What would happen if there were better health services. So, you know, Bill gates is all about health, you know, and a lot of global health and stuff.

So I want you to think through what would happen if there is a health improvement.

Yes. Yes. Um, perhaps same level of income, but lower population.

Um, because birth rates would tend to increase with better services.

Mhm. And Thatrillionate also tends to decrease. So what what will decrease.

Death rates would tend to drop. Uh huh. So so how so what will happen.

So tell me what will happen to population? Um, it will remain the same.

It will remain the same. What will happen to incomes? I think so, so it will lower population, but lower.

But the income population will lower and income will remain the same.

How about you? The population increases.

Uh huh. Um, yeah. Then income might decrease.

Might decrease. Why?

Um, because if the productivity level remains the same or constant, for the more people, it's going to crowd out resources and things.

Very good. So you see, smart people can answer the question.

Others use models. Right. So let me use a model.

So what's the comparative static. I'm moving the death rate down.

Right. So mental health care implies death rate moves down.

It means the equilibrium point moves to the left. It means that now you get more population and lower incomes, more population and lower incomes.

Why do you get lower incomes? Yes.

Productivity of the economy. The overall productivity of the economy remains the same.

So the more number of people for the same production capacity it gets.

But why don't they die? Because the health services is better.

Uh, so now, thanks to the health services, you can be poorer and still survive.

Okay, so that's why I say this is dismal science.

Indeed. This is really the dismal science. You you are now enabling the ability for for people to to survive while being still poorer than before.

Okay, so. So, yeah.

Just saying. What? Uh. So again.

Yes. Quincy. Oh, yeah.

Yeah. Uh, in real life, I'm just curious. Like, how would poor people be able to afford high quality healthcare to make them survive?

Well, maybe say, suppose you you give them, uh, uh, tuberculosis vaccine or a polio vaccine or something,

or better water services, something that improves, uh, health conditions in general.

Uh, and they say, say you did that.

Okay. So it's like the minimum level of survival.

Well, whatever. Whatever lowers the death rate. Okay?

Whatever intervention lowers the death rate would have this effect, you know.

So. So, um, you know, population growth was so low for so long because agricultural productivity growth was so low for so long.

So, so in some sense, what you're seeing there is a history of relative stagnation in technological progress.

Um, now, when it started to accelerate the after the year 1000 in Europe, mainly a all of the productivity increases went into population growth.

Okay. So this is let me tell you the reason why I suddenly, you know, it hit me in the face when when I went to Bihar in 2005,

for the Indians in the group, in 2005, um, the, uh, the chief minister called it the governor of Bihar have been kicked out for corruption reasons.

This was a guy called Lalu and there was direct rule from the national government on Bihar and the national government.

There was um a monte Carlo.

Wala was an old friend and the father of an MP idea of, I don't know, over a decade ago.

And uh, and he, he asked me to go to be hired and see, you know, what would you do?

So I went to be ha. And, you know, it's very, very useful as an economist, I must say that you always have a benchmark in your fate,

in your head when you look at something, if you don't have a prior, you don't learn.

When you have a prior. It helps you see surprises and you learn when your priors are falsified.

So it's super useful to have priors when you go to a place.

Okay, so my prior state is Venezuela.

It's, uh. Uh, so it's it's my default.

So I say Bihar. Venezuela, Bihar has three times the population of Venezuela.

Um, and it has one ninth of the surface area of Venezuela.

So it has 27 times the population density of Venezuela.

Okay. You say, well, there's a lot of people in Bihar. How do you fit so many people in such a small place?

Okay. 27 times the population density of Venezuela.

So? So you say, well, you know, you might stick them all together because the capital city of Venezuela is Caracas,

my hometown, and it has about 5 million people.

So about a sixth of the population. So if you say, okay, capital of Bihar is Patna, so one sixth of 90 million is going to be 15 million.

Okay. So the reason why I have so many people is because they have a city of 15 million, right?

Wrong. Patna has 1 million. It doesn't have 15 million.

And the population is essentially mostly rural while the population of Venezuela is mostly urban.

Right. So the question I asked myself is, why are there so many poor people in Bihar?

And I would ask you, why are there so many poor people in Bihar? By the way, he competes with Orissa as the poorest state in in India.

Right. So why are there so many poor people in Bihar? Siddharth.

Primarily dependent on agriculture now industries.

Okay, but why are there so many? Why are there 27,000 more people?

And. Yes. Maybe the health care is too good.

Very good for him.

Maybe in the rural, uh, places, there's more, like, easy to have local population.

If you're in a city very concentrated, it's a lot harder to achieve than a.

Well, I mean, and usually if you're going to survive on agriculture, you need more land.

In cities, you need less land. So you can put a lot of people in Hong Kong or a lot of people in, in, in England and in Singapore.

Um. Because you know you need less land in urban areas to sustain the population or, you know, to live.

So, yes, uh, maybe governance with the poor state government.

So even though the high agricultural capital capacity allowed for population to grow, what is the higher?

Why is there higher cultural capacity? Or is it just because I'm assuming they have higher agricultural capacity, right?

Uh huh. Because of the very high population that they have. Uh, okay.

Okay. So what you're saying is that the reason why there are so many poor people in Bihar is because there's so much land to farming.

You know, there's 27 times less land than in Venezuela.

It's the administrative jungle. Well, you can always cut it down.

Uh, there's so many poor people in Bihar because the land is so fertile, so there's so many poor people in Bihar because the land is so fertile.

If the land was less fertile, there would be fewer poor people in Bihar, right?

So the fertility of the land gets expressed in higher population.

It doesn't get expressed in higher income. It gets expressed in higher population.

So there are so many poor people in Bihar because the land is so fertile.

Yes. Are you saying that, um, if your economy is really heavily agriculture based, then kids, then having lots of kids is more useful if you're in?

No, I'm saying if this is an equilibrium phenomenon, everybody's having the same number of kids.

And the question is how many survive? Right. So I'm not I'm not I'm not delaying marriage, I'm not constraining, etc.

This is an equilibrium outcome. Okay. Let me show it to you more starkly.

You have Burundi and you have Somalia.

Have you seen pictures of Somalia? What does it look like?

Yes. It's a desert, right? Have you seen pictures of Burundi?

This is a lush highland. Super green.

Okay. Which country is richer?

Poor only or Somalia? You can check your Somalia.

Huh? Somalia is about 38% richer than plan B, but Burundi is much more fertile than Somalia.

So which country is more densely populated? Somalia has 15 people per square kilometers and Burundi has 890.

Okay. So while these differences are, you know, percentages these differences are orders of magnitude.

So we have orders of magnitude differences in density.

And you know, maybe it is more convenient to be near the coast than to be, you know, landlocked.

And maybe, you know, for that reason, Somalia has other possibilities that Burundi doesn't have, etc.

But the fact that the land is fertile only gets expressed in how many people you have not on how rich you are.

Okay. All right. Good.

And so how would you know if a country is affected by Malthusian dynamics?

Well, in principle, we have this idea that any good news goes into population.

Okay. Health improvements. Population.

Green revolution. Population. Fertility. Population. Yes.

Coffee. Uh, before that, I just kind of good question.

Um, isn't suppose like fertility of the land to be decreasing?

Let me guess. Like the more you cultivate the land is not like a constant factor.

We are attributing that to like that population size, fertility, land.

Is it like have you so ask yourself the question how many calories can you produce in a hectare in a year?

So anybody here from Indonesia. Yeah, well, in Indonesia, Java is the most densely populated place on Earth.

Why? Uh, I think because of, uh, job opportunities.

Because of what opportunities? Job opportunities.

But historically. Why why why are there so many poor people?

So many people in Java? Uh, historically.

Because I think, uh, most of the base. Can you put your.

Yeah, yeah. Uh, most of the business activities are concentrated in Java.

Right, right. That's why I said before urbanization. I mean, there were many, many people living in Java way before, you know,

everybody moved to Jakarta because, uh, the fact of the land cause a lot of volcanoes in Java.

Well, it's it's the volcanoes I haven't paid attention to.

But you have three rice crops a year in Indonesia.

It's the only place that has three crops a year of rice.

So you just can produce many more calories per hectare.

And if you think I need 2000 calories per capita, how many hectares do I need to generate that capital?

So the more fertile land you need less less land to generate enough food for a person.

So the more fertile the land, you just get more persons. Right.

So so again, the idea is that if you are under Malthusian dynamics, good news go into population.

They don't go into income per capita. So here is uh, the average rate of population growth.

And here is the average rate of total GDP growth.

And this is the 45 degree line where GDP per capita is constant.

So, you know, all of the countries that are close to the red line in some sense, you might say, you know, they seem to be.

It's all good news. Go into population. GDP per capita doesn't move if God knows.

So some countries say Gambia, Kenya, etc. they're growing a lot, but population is growing a lot.

So a lot of the population, a lot of the GDP growth just goes into maintaining people at the same at the same level.

So so it means that for some people, for others, for example, all of the countries here, there's much more GDP growth than population growth.

So you have rising incomes per capita. Okay. Good.

Here I'm going to take the ratio of population growth to total GDP growth.

And the Malthusian equilibrium would say you're at one.

So countries here sort of around one would have uh, you would,

you would say they look like I'm not choosing from countries above that have more population growth and GDP growth.

So they are actually getting poorer.

So all the countries above one are getting poorer. And all the rich countries are kind of down here.

And by the way, can anybody tell me why you have in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates declining GDP per capita?

This actually is a it's an interesting factoid in it will.

Yes, it's a net migration. Is it net migration.

But why would they why would people want to go there if, if, if you know, if the stuff is not growing,

why why why why are people moving there to maybe work in service industry or other why jobs are available.

Why? Because you have already you have to think more general equilibrium in general.

You have to understand, you know, think more general equilibrium.

Yeah. Um, basically they have two classes of people, and the marginal utility of one is different from another.

So going from a poor country with lower and marginal income, let's say, uh, to uh, UAE increases very marginal income.

One, it doesn't hurt to those of the higher class. Let's call. But okay.

But a when does the process stop or what the what checks the process when you get to labor.

And what happens is. So, so let me, let me.

I have a lot of material to cover, so I'll tell you the answer.

It's a bit tricky, but if you have one sector which is oil that produces a lot with almost no people.

So the productivity in oil is infinite. Super high right?

And oil generates income. You want to spend that income.

What do you want to spend that income in. And restaurants and houses in in amenities and.

No. Right okay. All of these things have average productivity, which are a small fraction of productivity in the oil sector.

So if the price of oil goes up, you're richer.

And because you're richer, you want more people driving you around, cooking for you, a building, a bigger house, and so on.

Just the average productivity in those industries are a fraction of productivity in oil.

So you simply get a composition effect where you get an expansion of low productivity sectors.

And so total productivity growth declines. I worked for a long time both in Saudi and in the United Arab Emirates.

And these guys both have productivity councils and they wanted to increase.

GDP per worker to increase productivity. I say, look you're set up to measure declining productivity.

If you're going to do it at the aggregate level, you're not going to see anything useful.

This is just a composition effect. It's just what a healthy economy does.

It's not a sign of something bad. It's just a.

You know just how life is. Yes. So this is super exciting to me.

Um, in the in the 19th century, when all these new technologies came in, in England,

you also have this massive expansion of people going into domestic service.

Um, which sounds sort of similar to me, almost like just this huge number of people going into service off the farms, into service.

And so simultaneously, again, you have a super high productivity and low.

Um, so I'm wondering what your views are on how we get out of that,

how how jobs end up being because people eventually moved out of all those domestic service jobs.

What's the what's the move for an economy to go from being this super polarized to higher per capita everywhere?

By the way, I'm not sure. I'm not sure that, um, these height differences in productivity should translate into differences in wages,

because everybody would get paid their marginal wage, the marginal product and wages would tend to equalize across sectors.

So but what we're saying is that the past of the UK, of Britain, England looks a little bit like the present of, uh, India or Peru,

where I have a friend who spends most of the time like nine months of the year in British Columbia and three months of the year in Peru.

Okay. Um, he just went back from the summer vacations in Peru, back to British Columbia.

And I asked him yesterday, so how's life? I said, well, you know, getting used to a no, no family help, no.

No nannies, no stuff. Right. Because in in British Columbia, the, um, opportunity cost of labor is just too high.

You cannot afford nannies, but in India, in Peru, you can afford a nanny.

So your consumption basket radically changes because of this relative price.

So I would say England would look a little bit like Peru. And that's why in, in, you know, Downton Abbey, you had so many cooks in.

I mean, what what do we call it from what, what are these men call them?

Uh, footmen. Footman, footman. Anyway. Okay, so so let me show you a anybody here from Pakistan?

Yes. So. And Korea. Yes.

Okay. So so this is something that has happened over the course of my lifetime.

Okay. Whenever we talk demographics, you need a certain time perspective.

Okay? I was born before 1960. So this happened in my lifetime.

This is an index of rural population.

Over the course of my lifetime, rural population in Korea declined by half.

Rural population in Pakistan quadrupled over the course of my lifetime.

Okay, so we can ask ourselves, what are the economic consequences of these two factors?

If we think Malthusian, you know, the amount of land in Korea, the amount of land in Pakistan is fixed right by the international borders.

You can get more out of the land you have. But, you know, in short of a war, you're not going to have more land per capita overall.

Okay, so here I have the rate of growth of rural population.

And here I have the rate of growth of agricultural output per rural person.

Okay. So this is like GDP per capita, but I'm not doing it per capita nationally but per capita rural.

Okay. Of the people living in rural areas. And this curve is a 2% rate of growth of agriculture per rural person.

Okay. So notice here you get zero agriculture per cup.

I mean not per world person per. Per hectare 2% productivity growth per hectare.

So you see that countries here get all their population all their productivity growth go to population growth.

Right. But the countries I mentioned were first India and China.

Notice here in India in a, you know, population grew by 150% in rural areas.

And in China, it it's kind of like back to 1960.

So the growth rate is kind of zero. It went up for a while then down for a while okay.

And nothing as dramatic as Korea. So.

India this is 2% growth right.

So in India productivity growth per hectare was kind of like a little bit lower than that of China.

But a lot of the difference is the fact that in in this period of 40 years a to 2018, between 1978 and 2018,

population growth in rural areas in India was growing, while population growth in rural areas in China was falling.

So that's why you got higher GDP per capita growth in China than in India, just because of of the lower population growth.

This is Pakistan and this is Korea.

Pakistan actually had productivity growth per hectare in excess of 2%, while Korea had essentially productivity growth of 2%.

But GDP per capita, our GDP per rural person in Korea was much faster than in India, 100% of it,

150% of it because of different demographics that people in Korea were working with more land per capita because population declined by half.

And and while in Pakistan, you have to fit four times more people in per unit of area.

Okay. So you see that these dynamics are present okay.

You know. Quick. So let me ask now, what would it take analytically to get a country out of the Matthews equilibrium?

Okay. And how did countries get out of the Matthews in equilibrium?

Okay. So so again this is the common fusion model.

How do I transform the Matthews model into a non Malthusian model.

It's simple. You only have three curves. Yes.

And if you add, um, concentration of energy through time.

And so people get, um, more productive through the use.

Well, but that's like, uh, that's like the green revolution.

You get more people. Right.

We already played with them. Yes. You need to decouple.

You need to decouple. You need to decouple population from agricultural production.

Uh huh. And that does what to me, that allows me to increase income.

Both coverage of it, uh, increasing, uh, the chance of farmland.

So you're smart. I'm not. So I use models.

You tell me, what do I need to do in this model? When?

When you, um. If you like, uh, another curve on the graph, um, below, you will get its own equilibrium, and it may not match the previous example.

Okay. Can you put your. So you want me to add another curve?

What would that curve be? Um productivity.

Right. But productivity is just is reflected in this in this curve.

Oops. Productivity is reflected in this curve.

And we already move that curve out. And we got the Green revolution and it all went to population growth.

Yeah. What I was going to say.

But there was that when I was thinking about making population exogenous independent, at least from incomplete evidence,

that maybe if you like, make the, the lower curve, uh, horizontal if I make it or is untrue, why would I make it horizontal?

What will be the logic? So population is like, uh, income precarious?

Uh, I don't actually know choice. Horizontal or vertical, but but that way you will they will not be like, affected by the other, um, parallel.

Yeah. Something similar. You can change the slope of the population income per capita because of marginal costs.

Okay. So I can switch this curve now I can always switch this curve in PowerPoint and I can tell you how to do it in PowerPoint.

The question is what does this mean in real world. What does this mean in real world.

Increasing marginal include with the increasing population your income is also increasing.

Look at that somehow.

If I get more people together is better than they have fewer people together.

But that means like kind of like agglomeration economies, right?

So it probably means that you have something like a division of labor and a division of labor.

That means that now the whole can sort of be better than the parts, and that means that economic activity will want to concentrate.

It's not that people want to spread apart so that I can have more land.

So I want to move to the Midwest. I want to move west. I want to move to California.

I want to be away from other people so I can have more land.

No. People are going towards each other. Right?

They're trying to get together because, you know, the more the merrier.

So? So you need something that generates a payoff to having more people interact.

Okay. So it's a production process where land is not important, but human interaction is.

Human interactions and that those. Human interaction is going to lead somehow to productivity growth.

We're finishing a project in Wyoming. The largest city in Wyoming has 63,000 people.

And then we calculated what are the industries that exist in cities of 63,000 people,

and find that most industries cannot survive in a city of 63,000 people because they need,

you know, a more diverse labor force, and you can find it in 63,000 people.

Right. So anyway, so so while mathematically this is enough to get you out of the Malthusian trap,

because now you get this positive feedback that as income per capita grows, population grows.

As population grows, income per capita grows as income per capita grows, population grows.

And this is what we saw in the last period. We saw a boom in population growth and a boom in income per capita growth in the last two centuries.

Especially in the rich countries. Thank. Gordon.

Now you might say, okay, it only took to shift in the slope of a curve.

Why did it take millennia? Why did it take millennia?

Right. Why? Why was. You know, whenever you have an equilibrium.

It is an equilibrium. And an equilibrium means that you can kick it and wants to go back to where it started.

Right? So there must be something that makes an equilibrium.

An equilibrium, right? It must. There must be deep forces that are.

You say oh, no. Just, you know, just interact with more humans, right?

Well, you can't, you see, just, you know, put people together and stuff will harmony.

So. So this is a little bit the, the, the thing that makes it stable that if people are poor, poor people spend most of their income in food.

Right. But food comes out of agriculture, and agriculture is intensive in land.

So if you're going to produce food, you need to spread out, right?

So the majority of the people have to be in rural areas, and there are forces for them to spread out, not to come together.

Okay. And agriculture has this thing that it produces less per capita, per unit of hectare as population growth.

So if you keep hectare constant and you put just more people in the same hectares, you get less per person.

And rural areas are not ideal for the division of labor.

I mean, the whole point of the division of labor, as we will see in the course,

is that within a certain catchment area, you can get a lot of different workers to go to a certain place,

and people are attracted to go to that certain place by just looking at how much

time they spend in traffic and how horrible and unpleasant are those traffic jams.

And still they they still want to do it.

No, there must be some attractive force to make them do it.

Okay. So now that we understand why, you know, it is an equilibrium, right?

That that a, you cannot have the division of labor, you cannot have much interaction because people have to spread out because they need to use land.

And and so they are far away from each other. Right.

So how did the world escape the massive trap?

And the idea is that there must have been something that caused an increase in agricultural productivity.

Okay, but maybe an increase in agricultural productivity,

in part due to some urban craftsmen that could produce tools and materials that would increase agricultural productivity.

Okay. So now you're having things that are done in cities that increase productivity in rural areas,

and they're going to buy from cities, but what are they going to pay with?

We're going to pay for these. These tools and materials that they're buying from cities, huh.

With food. Because that's what they produce.

And directly, you know, with food. So now suddenly they are generating an agricultural surplus that is sustaining a city.

Right? And then the city is going to be able to start exploiting these agglomeration economies.

But the city needs food. And for the city to be able to have the food.

Right. Something somebody must be able to produce more food than they are eating in exchange for something that they find valuable.

So you need to generate this dynamic between, uh, city and its agricultural hinterland.

Okay. So why was there so much violence in ancient times?

Let me change it. Why is there so much violence in Ethiopia today?

Anybody here from Ethiopia? We've worked a lot on Ethiopia, and actually we were derailed by a civil war in the middle of the project.

Why? Yes.

They were not big states, you know, they were people competing for power over something.

But. Well, I don't know.

It was the Roman Empire. And so there were some big states here.

Yes. I think because of lack of resources, it was like a survival mechanism to resort to violence, to capture the most resources when you.

We did this or it hasn't. Is it because they're landlocked and so that trading potential is lower with other economies?

Well, I think essentially because the source of wealth is land controlled.

If you control the land, you control the wealth. So if you are in control, the land is for you.

If I'm in control, the land is for me. The source of wealth is land.

Right. What's the source of wealth today? It's not land control.

So it's, you know, big. You know, the US is a megalopolis around between Boston and D.C.

It's another megalopolis between, I don't know, San Diego and San Francisco, maybe in a megalopolis around Chicago.

And the rest is a national park. Right. Right.

So? So who cares, right? That's not where.

That's not where the action is. Where Silicon Valley. Right. So it's not land control.

It's control over the source of wealth is something different.

But if the source of wealth is land and land control and you're fighting over control of land,

and in the case of Ethiopia, land, there are no private property rights on land.

You have use rights which are allocated by your tribe.

So if your tribe has more land, a, you probably get more allocation.

So you want your tribe to expand and, you know, kick out the other tribes from land.

And so that's and that's in some sense what the Pax Britannica brought to India.

That's maybe the Mongols brought to India too, or that's what.

So so it's it's kind of telling each one of these maharajas and you're fine if you don't mess up with your neighbor,

if you mess up with your neighbor, you mess up with me. And so you kind of try to maintain some equilibrium.

Don't you dismiss the importance of culture and love because there was still many wars after the 1000 drop the 1945,

and then it started to go down as far as, you know where.

It was called the World War. So. I didn't understand that.

I understand the question. Like, uh, we talk about like international like between countries violence and intra country gun violence,

but I don't know, I would assume I don't know, I haven't checked the data, but we found world wars.

Things tend to get better on the international level, even even with civil wars.

I think I saw some that I what actually.

So don't you dismiss kind of I mean, I don't want I don't want to make a whole theory of, uh, the reduction of violence.

This guy Steven Pinker has a book on arguing that there's this long trend reduction in violence.

But the bulk of the violence historically was this, uh, call it civil war, local wars, and and actually the idea of the Leviathan,

the idea of the state was precisely to stop these, to have somebody say, look, uh, no, no conflict here.

You don't mess with your neighbor. Uh, I am, you know, you do what I say so that somebody has to impose a monopoly on violence.

But the monopoly on violence is hard to impose.

If, you know, you can grab some resources from your neighbor, and.

And it's okay. Well, you know, in a, in a more urban setting.

So, uh, where, where the source of wealth comes from human networks, you know, if, uh, if Putin gets Mariupol,

he gets, uh, a piece of land that is worthless without any of the human networks that made it valuable.

So you get, you know, you get, uh, it's not a it doesn't it destroys a lot of value, but it doesn't make Russia rich.

Right? So, uh, anyway, so, um, so we're going to get out of this process because of the Industrial Revolution.

And the Industrial Revolution has something to do with manufacturers.

Now, what does that word manufacture?

Where does it come from? What's the etymology of manufacturers?

Hmhm hand. So manufacturers means handmade.

Have you stopped to think about that? Because we think of manufacturer as the opposite of handmade like you think.

Artisans do things by hand and manufacturers do things by machine.

But historically, manufacturers in the 18th century was something super labor intensive, which was done by hand.

Right? Now the steam engine was introduced.

Do you know when the steam engine was introduced and why the steam engine was introduced?

And and you can answer because you're a historian.

Yeah. Egypt. Uh, 3005. Uh, the steam engine, not the wheel steam engine.

I think they used it first for some kind of temples in Egypt.

In Egypt? Maybe. Maybe. Um, let me then change.

Why did what introduce a an improvement to the steam engine?

Okay. So yes, Vincent in in England, they had a lot of coal and they needed a thing to reduce the water inflow in the coal, um, uh, mines.

So, so energy basically that they could generate.

But it's the engine. Right. So you think that steam engines were produced because we wanted to introduce them

in manufacturing or because you want to put locomotives and so on and so forth.

That happened like 50 years later or 30 years later.

The original motivation was that you were extracting coal as means and cents, and as you extract coal, you know, it rains in the UK.

I don't know if you've noticed. Yeah. That's why it's so green.

Right. Um, and, you know, you extract something from the land, the water will try to seep in.

So you have to be pumping a water out of them, uh, out of the mine.

And that's why that was the original motivation. But then obviously, they discovered a way to transform coal into energy through, um, a steam engine.

And then you had a process whereby people thought, gee, where else can I use this innovation?

Right. Um, now this, uh, this idea of, of putting, mixing, manufacturing, which was already happening,

by the way, Adam Smith talks about manufacturing before the steam engine.

He published his book in 1776, which was more or less the same time at which what was publishing his patent?

So if Adam Smith is reflecting on a world without steam engines, with manufacturing,

without steam engines, and this manufacturing is going to need some source of energy,

and I have a home in the Berkshires, which is about two hours west of here, and this is about a mile from my home.

It's, uh, it's a very old plant that makes and paper.

And why is it here? Yes.

Was it using water as their source of energy?

It was using water as the source of energy. It's right next to here.

This is a dam and it's trying to use water.

And there are a bunch of of towns here that are all around the Housatonic River.

And they all developed in the 18th century to exploit the energy of the Housatonic River, when suddenly they invent the steam engine screw rivers.

Who cares about rivers? And this went into decline in the 19th century.

They started abandoning all of the manufacturing that had developed, because now what you need is proximity to coal,

and, you know, you're closer to call if you're in a port where you can ship it in, and so on and so forth.

So. So the, um, the Industrial revolution, some people argue,

had something to do with a marriage of something you might want to call science with, something you might want to call technology.

Okay. In a this is Voltaire and this is Pasteur.

Now, Voltaire wrote a, you know, he was super funny and witty,

and he noticed that the Brits used vaccines in his time, 18th century, middle of the 18th century.

Uh, and and the French would not because the Brits were empiricists and the French were Cartesian.

The Cartesian wanted to do things from first principles, and they didn't understand the principle under which vaccines would work.

But the Brits had an ambassador in Turkey, and in Turkey they learned that, you know, if you infect somebody, they become immune.

They don't use those languages. So this ambassador brought the idea from from Turkey.

It just kind of it works. But I don't have a theory of why it works.

But then obviously, Pasteur a century later developed the theory of microbes and germs and so on,

and how it works and why it would work, and what would you need to do to make it work and whatever.

Right. So, so this is sort of like this is empirical knowledge of, you know, this works in practice.

And this is sort of like this is the theory of why it works in practice.

And and you see this in, in, in a lot of the development in, in, for example, in electricity.

Faraday and Edison were tinkerers. They did not really understand deeply what it is that they were doing, but they were just tinkering.

Right. Relative to Maxwell, which, you know, is going to write the Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism and so on,

that is going to unify not only electricity with magnetism, but also with light and, and and stuff.

Right. And eventually with chemistry if you want. And.

So the role of the Industrial Revolution is that suddenly you have the marriage of a prescriptive knowledge.

If you have knowledge on how to do things in the world, call it technology with propositional knowledge,

which is knowledge about the nature of the world, that there are such things as germs out there.

And maybe there's a germ theory of disease that the disease about something being infected by germs and so on.

And it's very interestingly reflected in the history of education, uh, in, in the 1860s.

Uh, there was a lot of scientific development that was being used in, in production.

And so the question was, what was the right training for an engineer?

What should an engineer be? And in those days, an engineer was an apprentice.

Who worked with another. So it was not a university degree and there was a big discussion.

Should engineers be in a university degree or not?

Well, the Brits decided no, this is you know, the people who do well in high school should go to get their A-levels and then go to college and so on.

But those that don't do too well but not good enough, you know, then they will go to, you know, these apprenticeships, it'll become engineers.

Okay. Mind you, they are trying to do aerospace, nuclear power generation and so on with the more feeble minded.

That debate happened here in this area when in the 1860s, somebody came knocking at Harvard's door saying, you have to open a school of engineering,

because now the economy needs these people who understand chemistry or understand electricity or understand these things.

And Harvard said, over our dead body, we are not going to tarnish our brand.

Right. We're not going to tarnish our brand with these, you know, ideas.

Right. And that's why MIT is where it is.

It's on the same Massachusetts Avenue, but not the same brand, because they didn't want the brand to be tarnished.

And so so it's this marriage that is going to happen in the 19th century.

It's going to also happen with with them, an energy revolution.

And the energy revolution is going to substitute human energy for, you know, mechanical energy.

And if it was human energy, then the average male has more capacity to exert force than the average female.

Uh, but if it's the machine that's putting the force, then that gender difference kind of goes out the window.

Right. And, um, if now there is more use for human capital, there's more use for human capital then,

by the way, Adam Smith wrote about the boredom of manufacturers because you were in his mind,

you were cutting the production process and everyone was just doing a little step and it was hyper boring.

So he argued that people should have access to education to increase in some sense the, uh,

the quality of their leisure so he could read books in their free time and do other things in a free time,

had nothing to do with applying education to a production process.

Because the production process had been dumbed down.

You had eliminated these artisans that had a lot of knowledge and substitute them for these people.

I mean, the good thing about the Industrial Revolution, one thing is that you could use children and women and not just, you know, artisans, right?

So so it was a dumbing down revolution, what he was worried about.

But in the 19th century, it was more important that, you know, that these people could maybe use knowledge.

And this is going to have implications for fertility, because now if you want to educate your children,

children in some sense become more expensive, right?

And this is what Gary Becker calls the trade off between quantity and quality of children.

Right now you want to have educated children, but if you are going to have educated children, you need to have fewer children.

Okay. So in some sense, let me, um, let me see if I have another one.

Um, so do all countries need to have an agricultural revolution to start the process?

So do they all need to go through this process where you have a town that's providing them with services,

and then you get agricultural improvements, and that allows the town to expand, etc., etc.

And the idea is that not really because a what you need, um,

you don't need to generate your own agricultural surplus if there's going to be a global market for,

for food, what you need to do is to be able to buy it.

So your city has to be able to buy the food, not necessarily by selling to its hinterland, but by selling something.

Right? So, for example, how did Venezuela become urbanized?

And here I'm taxing your knowledge of Venezuela, which is not necessarily your comparative advantage, but.

How did Venezuela do it? How did Venezuela become so urbanized or.

Was it done related to the discovery of oil? Uh huh.

And what does oil mean? If you lost money, you can buy stuff with.

So now you're trading oil for food so you don't have to generate your own food.

You just buy your food, right?

So you have to have something that you can export in exchange for the food, whatever it is that you can export, then you can get the process going.

Okay. Why has Bihar remained the rural?

Because it didn't have an agricultural revolution and they didn't have anything to trade, um, to get the process going.

Where if you don't have a surplus because you're mostly, you know, you're poor and at subsistence,

you, you don't really have a surplus, but maybe a, a, you know, had there been,

for example, the kind of manufacturing process in, in partner that had, you know,

demanded labor, maybe people would have gone to partner to, to produce, say, garments.

Ehm. And then they would have left the rural areas and they would have left more land per capita to those remaining in rural area.

So they might have gotten the process going. But partner was never connected.

I mean, to go to ports in, in Calcutta or to so the infrastructure was not there for partner to be integrated to, uh, to the broader Indian market.

So maybe that's what happened. So it's exports are going to play an important role in these transformations.

Exports is what allows you to make independent the life of the city from the constraints on the things that the city needs to buy,

because you can always import things with your exports.

Yes, yes. Um, one thing I would add is I need to be able to capture the rents from what you're exporting.

So I just looked in Sierra Leone and they export a lot of diamonds and so on.

But the government gets to.

