[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Did you planning to pick a G3? Oh, you're thinking negotiation.

Um, no. Not negotiation. But, uh, being human, I want to do that, one Marshall guy said.

But to join me to say yes, I would do that after this class because I'm like, no place because I'm shy.

I know. So is today is today. Today is the deadline.

No, the deadline is tomorrow. No, I want to do that one because I didn't take a leadership class.

Tomorrow is a deadline, which is, um. No. The German.

I think the registration opens today because the Crimson card was already open, so you could already put your things inside.

Um, I'm trying to see I have one. How many? So we can do two or just one?

Two? You can do two. It depends, because some are only one week.

Some are like two weeks. But I think the two credits, two credits, they are just like one week.

One week? Yeah. Week. Um, but I'm thinking that I want to at least get four units out of German.

So we take two courses. One, I know that it will go into beating.

Um, which one is that? Like programing? It's.

No, it's an MLT something with Julie Battaglia.

You guys famous? If you get I it's something about like, power and influence.

Um, uh, but it always goes into beating then Julie.

But no communication, no writing. I think there's an open thread thing.

Yeah. To do it. It's like in the end there is always something that you have to produce.

But, I mean, you just have to a week and you get to crazy.

So I'm like, no, it's really worth it. And then it works in the one you want it.

You're not in every of this class there will be something, so you will have the paper to write.

And so it's not only that you will come sitting because you could be creative.

You have to produce something. What I don't know because I didn't look into this is right.

The Marshall guys. Yeah. 316 right.

Yes. And the forum is and uh. Of course. Right. Yeah.

If you click there, I think it's even on the course description.

So you do a screen. Or you go straight.

Yes. You go straight. Yeah. So you have this experience but you get to know you can be screened much.

Good morning Johan. Good morning. Good morning. Good morning.

The quantum number has a quantum in this condition. That's why most of us are waiting for years.

The other thing is that you have to choose. I think there were two I really wanted to do.

But they happen at the same time. Yeah.

Which one? It was that one from Julie and one with By Train, which goes.

Well, yeah. I only know the professor.

Yeah, because which ones are you talking about? Because you can just write the usual.

You can write down the name of it. Here it is.

Yes. The code is like it's three mld.

3:06 p.m. I hope you know the name.

I know it's a subject. Name is very different.

And they have no names. I know this one.

Yes. Easy.

Peasy. To. Stem. No, no, this is empty.

Um, so it's, uh, management and leadership in decision making to.

Yeah, I could do that 12 times.

That's that's interesting because you're thinking so many people that we say no to us and that's what's funny.

I think. I.

Like my customers. Like I'm in the Jeep.

Yeah. Nobody's going to go.

Junior. Okay, let's get started.

Okay, so today we will be reviewing some key aspects about diagnosing fiscal policy.

This might be particularly important if your country has a marked ratio going on a sometimes a we see problems on finance.

We see problems on monetary policy, but they are tied to the fiscal policy one way or another.

So having this a framework is important when analyzing your country.

So this is just a, uh, a brief reminder for your final projects.

Remember the idea that you formulate a growth question. Just don't assume that we know your growth question.

You got to a percent from from the start, right?

You got to guide us through your narrative. That is very important.

A you don't you're not required to show all your work.

So the analogy with the restaurant is that there is a kitchen version.

Uh, there's uh, you know, the one that gets served on the table.

Ideally, you just want to keep all the analysis that you run on the background in case they're necessary, but just focus on your narrative, okay?

We remember. So some of the work that we did for national accounts might help you understand.

What are the threats to growth. A what are the drivers of growth, how sustainable those drivers are and a leveraging that you can sharpen your growth.

Question. So go down the diagnostics tree a as we have illustrated a again you don't have to tell us why some things are not binding.

Just keep them on the background. Um, very importantly, once you have identified your potential,

constrain a positive syndrome that is basically asking yourself why is this in equilibrium?

Why is this happen?

A so probably you won't get, you know, the most elaborate work and there are many questions that will be unresolved or halfway there,

but still you can try to make an effort to think, why is this happen?

And to your ability, we will see some of that next week.

Okay. Just general feedback can be said for a.

What we've seen so far. A.

Kind of give us the sense that the quality of the analysis compared to previous year has increased.

We expect you to leverage the data tools that we've a share with you, a, I don't know, enterprise surveys,

but digging more than just the overall picture that you get when you get to the word beach,

or maybe a trying to navigate the microdata A or I don't know, I don't see any groups using the camera.

People's tool that we shared is like, okay, if you're saying or you're claiming that electricity might be a constraint in your in your country,

why not asking how intensive on electricity is my export basket?

And then if I get a result that it turns out that there is very high.

How do you incorporate that into your analysis? It may be the case, for instance, if we're talking about the mining country,

which mining tends to be intensive in electricity, as you know, it may be the oil for the mining sector.

They somehow over overcame the constraint, right.

May be a plausible hypothesis. And then you have to explain and to dig into that just as an example.

But here some general feedback a frame your analysis using the diagnosis text we've seen.

So don't start just showing graphs or indicators.

This is high. This is low in respect to peers. Or some people don't even mention peers.

Just this is higher disease though, which make it very difficult for us to get a sense of what is happening.

A and be explicit about what is the shadow price, the jump or change right,

or the differentiated outcome by sectors that you observe when assessing a potential constraint.

It is not enough, again, to establish that something is high or low, or that something is growing or falling.

What does even that mean? Right? Instead, try to frame your analysis as follows.

If X was a constrain, what would I expect to observe in other ways?

Given what I observe, what is the likelihood of these being a constraint?

A so yeah, just keep those in mind. Again, this is a work in process.

We want the P sets to be a tool for you a that helps you to a graph to your final project.

Right. So just have this in mind as you work on your final projects.

This is the a roadmap that we've had since the beginning.

We started here. Now we are here in micro diagnostics.

And now we're going to briefly talk about fiscal policy. Uh, these are some of the topics that we discussed in the last a review session.

Monetary policy volatility a real shocks, a fiscal procedure quality, original seed, um, budgetary institutions,

how political economy shape these institutions and to what degree this centralization, uh, is a something relevant in a country or not?

Uh, but let us start just by having a sense of what kind of data we're going to encounter when analyzing a fiscal accounts.

So one, a valuable resource that you can use is government finances statistics from the IMF.

This is a in the web page a another I mean this tends to be very good for the countries that are in the data set.

A when it that is not the case, I would advise you A to review article for its value.

They tend to be very comprehensive, and I will briefly show you an example of how they can be useful.

Uh, but just to give a sense, this is the statement of operations.

You will have something like revenues. You will have something like expenses. And then you will have subgroups among these categories.

Right. Then you will have non-financial transactions in non-financial assets.

A but you ideally want to understand how this is working.

A I don't know if a what are the source of revenue.

What are the source of expense? A what is happening here?

Uh, on the depth and right, just as a a general assessment.

So it is not as simple as expenditure minus revenues.

This is the typical equation that we've seen so far. But it's more nuanced than that.

Right. So we have different forms of expenditure.

Some of these expenditures. We tend to be more sticky if you want.

I mean, you've realized really that for most of your countries, a wage is in the public sector a are a big chunk of the expenditure a share, right?

A and it's not like, okay, you can not have that.

That's here. A in a matter of days or so.

Right. There is some certain stickiness. And also when it comes to a, I don't know, social benefits.

So understanding how these categories play a role is important, especially if you a need a or if you country have faced any sort of fiscal adjustment.

And same applies to taxes and understanding what is what are the sources of revenue.

A is critical in understanding what definition of government you're using is also important.

So when you mention fiscal deficit it be mindful about what level of government you're talking about.

So there is the budgetary government. There is the central government.

There is a general government. And there might be the Zoes and also the central bank.

And when you have everything up is something that we call consolidated public sector.

It's for most countries, especially developing countries.

It's hard to find the statistics and the consolidated public sector.

Again, the IMF tries to make the best of the data they have to estimate, eh, when possible.

This figures for consolidated public sector. Why this might be important.

Because you might imagine that the general government or the central government, which is again the budgetary government,

a plus social security A is running a surplus, but it is running a yeah, a surplus.

But when you incorporate the state owned enterprises, I don't know, the electricity company or the water,

a company a or the, I don't know the airline that the state owns and they run losses.

Then a the picture is not that friendly. Then you might have actually a deficit.

So understanding this different dimension is very is very, very important.

Uh, which one I choose. Well it depends right. It depends on your analysis.

It probably as you dig in you will a, a focus on the one that is most important.

So it matters how we measure. So this is I think data for South Africa.

So this is again the budgetary sense of the government central government, general government.

And you see that the figures refer a this is revenue.

This is expenditure. This is the fiscal balance.

So in the case of South Africa they coincide.

But this might not be necessarily the case.

Again, if you have a lot of state owned enterprises, or for instance, if the central bank is in one way or another financing the government,

those eh, liabilities or those, yeah, those accounts won't be necessarily reflected on the general government side.

You might have a surplus, say, but if you add up the accounts you might end up in a deficit.

So in this case they coincide. This is not necessarily the case.

A this is just, uh, breakdown of how expenditures look like.

So you have different sources of revenue. You have different sources of taxes.

Right. Taxes on this is this this comes again from the IMF.

This also you have a social contributions, right?

You have grants and you have other sources of revenue.

So this is just a comprehensive classification of the the revenues that you might find when looking into a fiscal statistics and tax revenue,

a very alert very country. So here you have I don't know.

So the Africa in blue this is income tax. But as you see it is not as important in Nigeria.

A in other countries say Germany, we have social security contributions.

They do not appear to be significant in Germany, in Africa or so.

So understanding also these dimensions and what drives a income for the government is important.

Guess now what was the source of this one? This is GFS.

This is a this one. Uh, okay.

All right. This government and again, this is tends to be very good for the countries that are in need of this.

All right. Okay.

Uh, we have a but let me emphasize when where you don't have good fiscal rate first, you, of course, want to check for national data if possible.

Uh, the IMF is always a reliable resource, but again, they don't always have the data.

You might go to national sources. You might also go to the article force if they have the most recent article for

might have important figures that you might want to incorporate into your analysis.

They typically do some sort of this a and again benchmarking is important right.

So how does my country does my country tax a lot in this category.

A if I just give give you a number like I don't know is like 20% of of of revenues.

Is that high or low. I don't know. Here I'm just including the countries in the, in the sample.

Right. And I can I can see South Africa.

Thanks a lot in this one. Right. Okay.

Not as much here. Right. Normal normal normal.

So this might help you understand where there are particularly particular characteristics that you want to understand or to dig in.

Also what is growing? What is falling?

Uh, you have to consider each percentage of GDP is the rate measured in the alternatives.

Uh, so another another way in which you can measure this is as a percentage of, I don't know, a revenue.

You can also try to get a sense of a, I don't know how these interplays with, uh,

for a researcher or with your experts, they try to get a sense of of what this relationship is, right?

Uh, in this case, this is the breakdown. A of a taxes.

Uh, we see a different a a sources of taxes.

A this is again for South Africa.

Uh, this is just the the detail of what you typically would found in the, um, national accounts or fiscal statistics manual, how they are classified.

Uh, most of it, again, tends to be associated to compensation of employees and a use of goods and services.

That tends to be very big categories, but this might vary depending on your country.

A this is uh, expenses for again, South Africa.

As you can see this is employees goods and services other and you have social benefits here.

So try to picture how some of these look for your country.

What is driving the uh the growth in expenditure.

If that is the case, what is driving a the fall in revenue if that is the case?

So a when you're putting the piece together is a this might be useful.

And again benchmarking is relevant. In this case we see an employee a compensation.

We see that a South Africa is kind of on the upper end.

And this might a help us guide or diagnostic.

This is another an alternative way of of seeing these.

This is by by function a or by organization.

This is expenditure by I don't know general public services defense.

Again this is good for the country that are in the data set.

And for the countries that report this information. Eh.

Sadly it is not widely available. But if you have this a granular level of data, you might leverage this for your analysis.

Uh, and then. These are some relevant questions that you should have in mind when digging into physical.

So again what is this structure a of revenues a of expenditures.

How have these evolved in time. Any drivers of large increases or decreases as these are had had been their creation or updates in taxes.

And what might be the political process driving expenditure?

Again, some of these categories might be sticky wages for instance, or social contributions.

Social subsidies in general. So if you have I don't know, uh, a subsidy that benefits certain a group that is relevant for,

for elections that might be a that might entail a political or economic problem there.

Right. Uh, good. So any question regarding how this might be important?

Again, what we've done so far. You just present it in detail.

And revenues, expenditures and definitions of government.

A some data sources that might be helpful for you to understand this, how you might think about a company in your country,

to other countries in order to establish if something is high or low or even a problem a an A, we now going to move into fiscal rules.

Any question? So, um, just a question, because you mentioned maybe it's just for the final project that we had to focus on the narrative.

But now as we've worked on the piece, it's it's really about digging into the data and presenting all this.

Um, because I had a question that is somehow related also to the previous, um, piece it because sometimes you test different things,

and maybe for the sake of staining to the kind of size of the assignment, you just choose, what is it the right way to do of?

We need to mention that we explore different things.

And in the end, this is the most relevant item that maybe we found in this, uh, the data.

This is the data that somehow backs up. And, uh, can you provide me with an example for what you're saying?

Yeah. Okay. I'm working on the Dominican Republic, and I was working on public goods and project.

I structured that part of the assignment, um, as.

Yeah, among others.

So one thing that I was testing, two things, it was either corruption or electricity that you mentioned also because when you look,

if you read like article for even, um, the world Bank, uh,

data and microdata and everything, you see that those are really the two tops, uh, using the price survey,

these are the two main binding constraints already identified by the public sector, but also the private sector.

And even when you go just on blogs, it's what you read about.

But in the end, I only mention, uh, electricity, which I felt maybe, um, it's is really what influence um,

production exports and uh, a lot of things maybe way more than, uh, corruption.

Because the question for me was, okay with corruption, they are still doing better.

So is there something else? But we did electricity.

Maybe that's prevents a bit more, um, the development and growth than corruption.

So these are the kinds of questions and the kind of assessment that I was doing.

So I just want to make sure that, um, it's more or less what you expected.

There was something different. Good. And. Well, I give you a response.

I maybe want to compliment something, but I think you're following the right track.

Like, you should start by trying to inform yourself about the context of your country.

And a good way of doing that is going to the the country.

A framework partnership of the world Bank or the article four of the IMF or whatever report is out there that allows you to get

contextual knowledge about your country and identify some patterns and identify a some of the salient threats that are there.

Right. Then you want to start asking questions.

So for instance, I don't know if it is electricity.

You might want to say, okay, firms are complaining about this okay.

They they are. So a is there a high price a high price here.

A what might be. So it is outages.

Is it a um I don't know generators a or is this something that difference that affects a sectors in a differentiated way.

So then you might see okay here maybe some camels here might be some peoples.

And then you start building your narrative and you don't have to explore everything.

Uh, that's why I think the first step is to inform yourself about the context and to guide your efforts to those things that might be relevant,

even the way you you find something that appears to be noisy.

I don't know, it turns out that it was actually, I don't know, water and it was not there like, oh, but look,

people are complaining here before, but that's typically the way in which you would approach the diagnostics.

A and this is a very important point that you raise.

Corruption tends to be a problem in many places.

And there it's tricky to mention, and it's tricky to identify what kind of corruption we're talking about.

There are different kinds of corruption, but but you can typically see without digging a too deep is the obvious question would be,

are countries that reported similar levels of corruption that complain as much or more about corruption, doing better or worse?

And that might save you time. How much to explore one or the other?

Eh? Do you want to add something? Okay, buddy, I hope that is useful.

But a and the next logical thing that you should do is come to office hours, and then we can explore this thing.

We can explore it more in detail a try to make sense of what you're observing.

Right. And again, more than for your assets which are important.

Consider this for your final project. Okay good.

So let me quickly guide you through fiscal rules. I won't get a very deep about this, but fiscal rules might be different things.

Are they their rules? Are they budget balance rules?

Are they expenditure rules or revenue transfer rules?

I will provide an example of that. Here is a valuable resource that maps a there's a database for fiscal rules.

But in essence fiscal rules are an attempt to a constrained discretionary fiscal expenditure.

You want to type fiscal spending a year or a fiscal performance in general to something a and then you might say,

okay, we cannot a we cannot surpass a, I don't know, 40, 60% of GDP on that.

That might be a criteria. I know that if a theory is okay, if the if we're in a positive end of the cycle, you cannot have a deficit.

You have to save. And if you're in a deficit, if you're in a, in a downturn, right,

in the in the in the downturn of the economic cycle, you can have a deficit because you want to be countercyclical.

And that might be adjusted by a structural balance or, or the cyclical thing.

A I mean, there are many details that you can or many specifics about different kind of rules expenditure.

It might be as simple as, uh, as affects a number that is established following certain criteria or revenue or transfer rule tends to be

associated with a well funds or a stabilization funds or investment funds that the country can set up.

Understand these in these in more than that,

the brief introduction that I have gives you understanding how these work or operating your country or not might be relevant.

Okay, maybe rather a so this is just a brief example of one of our projects.

Again a Sarah Bhajan a and I just want you to a picture this here's the central government.

Here are private oil companies. This is the state oil company A they have some profits and they send this money to the state oil fund.

They also pay taxes to the central government. Right.

The central government might incur in that the central government tax,

the non all in the economy and the central government spends in the oil economy.

Right. A this fund transfers some resources to the central government and some resources to the fund.

This is assets under management. But what I want to highlight here is that there are things that are contingent on oil prices.

Um, there are things that are non contingent in oil prices. So what could the noise come from.

The the noise could come or the source of volatility could come from all that is in red.

Right. But the things that are in green.

Then. In some sense a to be fixated at some level.

For instance, the government may want to keep spending certain amount even if there is not a a high anymore or a will want to have a larger transfers.

If a even if this is if this is low or might want to a you know a keep a acquiring depth and so forth.

So one relevant question that we are asking here is how we can a stabilize or help or help design a a rule that stabilizes the transfers to budget,

the transfer to the assets under management, the depth and the expenditure that the government has and in this case,

the the rule that they want is one that is currently adopted.

A is a is a debt ceiling.

And also uh, a rule on the non oil deficit.

Because if you are taxes from a royalties from oil then the the fiscal balance might be positive.

But if you subtract those then on the non oil balance tends to be negative.

So this is just again not for you to understand every little detail but but to

understand where the potential sources of volatility into accounts can come from.

Um, what tools we could set up to prevent a these volatility.

Okay. And then you might have a different alternatives.

So you might have a a strategic investment funds.

You might have a stabilization funds. You might have a saving funds.

And these tends to be very important particularly for countries that have natural resources.

So investment funds don't optimize their rate returns on investment.

They maximize the spillovers derived from investments in the local economy.

A stabilization funds are used for consumption smoothing.

That is, if the price is low, I can withdraw something from the fund and then use that to estimate my consumption.

A and assets must be liquid to ensure their timely usage,

and they are also saving funds a which the principal is ensure future generations benefit from present exploitation of nonrenewable endowments.

A and and there are some examples a Kiribati a.

And yeah. And then we have our longer investment horizon with a low proportion of liquid assets with low returns and a, uh, illiquidity premium.

A I would like to highlight maybe you know more about this topic,

but here you might also want to be careful about the political economy that is going on behind these funds.

A it is not obvious which kind of fund A is better for, for a country.

Uh, in Azerbaijan, the fund has a dual mandate stabilization and savings.

They tend to a be more on the a savings side and not in the stabilization side.

A and some people and I've heard the Minister of Economy myself say something like our retail oil or estate oil fund is saving.

For the, uh. For the kids.

For the kids. Tomorrow. In the future. Right. But for the kids abroad.

Because that the money is basically not getting a I mean, he's his notion is that they will it could potentially be,

uh, spillover into the economy, but they are just setting those resources aside while while there might be needed.

And then the question is, should we prioritize the people that come tomorrow or the people that are here today?

So those are all questions that go implicitly in the design of, of of these funds.

Uh, and then this is just a restating of restate, restating what I mentioned about some kind of rules.

Do we have inflow rules. What.

Go, go in a how much goes in investment is local or foreign a optimize return liquidity or spillovers and also rules a stable or countercyclical.

A constant decline or increase in expected balance is determined by fund balance or fund inflows, investment returns and so forth.

Right. All relevant questions that you want to a pose a when understanding how these mechanisms operate.

One one quick thing there if you can go back in,

is that you really want to distinguish between what the mandate of the fund is and what the fund does, actually does.

Yeah, I worked in a project in Kazakhstan and they have three different funds.

One was supposed to be an investment fund, and the other was supposed to be a stabilization fund,

and the other was supposed to be a, um, a savings fund.

But they weren't really operating like that. The one who was supposed to be, uh, an investment fund, um, a strategic investment fund.

You know, you basically have the mandate to invest in the local economy.

That's what makes it different. Right? But if you do that, that has political implications.

So it became sort of like the pocket money of family and friends of the elite of the government.

And, uh, it's impossible to know what the actual balance is right now in the government.

They don't know what the balance is because everything is, uh, in illiquid assets that are local.

Some of them are public, some of them are private.

Uh, there's thousands, hundreds of thousands, tens of thousands of, of of companies that are tiny there.

So how do you value them and so on. So that's something bad that can happen with strategic investments funds.

Uh, then uh, maybe your, your savings fund might be technically a savings fund, but there it's rules don't allow it to act as a savings fund.

So maybe you have a savings fund. But the when when the bad times come, there are some limits on how much you can take.

And so you can't really stabilize with it. And once it happens, then markets know that you're not really going to stabilize with it.

Uh, and then they have uh, savings fund. But the savings fund, um, which was uh, pension fund, um, was supposed to invest in,

in strategic assets that have instead of because the stabilization fund has to have everything,

mostly like in US treasuries that have like 1%, 2%, 3% yield.

That's very low value if you're going to have that money, uh, in the fund for a long time, that's not going to be good value.

Uh, but if you if you have a savings fund, like a pension fund, which is looking, you know, decades ahead,

the century ahead, uh, then you should in in theory, you go into the maximum return, you know,

risk adjusted maximum return in, in the, in the world like the Norwegian fund, invest in illiquid assets,

the best in real estate in investing nonpublic uh publicly offered companies and they get a premium from that.

Uh, but here in this context, uh, they were using the pension fund, the savings fund as another, uh, way of financing the government.

So he was mostly buying locally denominated public sector debt.

Right. So it was buying cheap bonds that are were reinforced to them where they were buying Soviet debt.

So it's a source of hidden debts from the consolidated public sector.

And so you really have to check like, you know, if you have a country like if you're in Ghana, if you're in,

in, in Saudi, for example, you really want to, you know, dig deep on on how it actually operates.

And the last thing I want to say with this is that, um,

you really want to know what is going into a fund and what is not are all the sources of all of.

Going into the fall. In the case of a surgeon that John mentioned in the royalties.

And taxes of oil companies are not going into the fund.

So they are as even if you stabilize the transfers from the fund to the central budget,

the royalties are still a source of volatility in bad times and in good times.

Uh, and in Kazakhstan, for example, the fund only got oil revenues, but they have all their maintenance.

They have like five other very large minerals in their export basket.

Basket. What about Guyana? Uh, you know, maybe they have, um, uh, fund for oil, but not a fund for gold.

Is there a source of volatility? There is that or copper or.

And so, you know, what is going into what sources of volatility are you really smoothing and which ones are you not.

Do you like to fix things. Uh, yeah.

So one exercise is very like an illustrative exercise that I was doing for the, uh,

US government here was, uh, um, you you can frame the transfer rules in different formats.

So what do you want from a transfer rule? From a transfer from the fund to the central government?

What do you want from a from a rule like that is you want to you want it to not be dependent on today's conditions.

You want it to be dependent on what happened years ago. Right.

But, uh, that can depend on different things, right?

You can make it dependent on how much went into the into a fund or how much the fund group.

And depending on which one of those you choose, uh, you have different long term, uh, implications.

So in this specific example, um, if they, if they invested everything from, from all the inflows, all the oil inflows, uh,

if the transfers depended 100% on the oil inflows, maybe not the ones from last year, but the ones like a smooth average of over at previous years.

Uh, the blue trajectory was what you would get, right?

You would get sort of like a constant, uh, um, a constant expected level of the fund which yields.

A constant. You know, return based on, um, constant expected oil inflows.

But if you make it dependent on, uh, on the investments of the fund, on the investment returns of the fund, you will get something like the gray line.

These are all obviously hypothetical.

Um, uh, and what you do with that is that you, you you would essentially be putting all of your money, all of your oil money into a fund,

and you would only, uh, be sort of spending the interest or a portion of, or in this case, 100% of the, uh, of the interest.

Uh, and, uh, I was proposing something that looked, in theory, similar to the orange line,

which makes it which, you know, diversifies the risk because both have risk.

Right? So if you're investing, if you have, uh, an investment rule that tries to maximize returns over the long term,

your returns look more like Berkshire Hathaway or like Blackrock than, than like, uh, than like treasuries.

So it's it's very jumpy. Right. And so it has a lot of volatility.

But if you have a bad year, if you grow 30% one year and you collapse 14% the next, you don't want to transfer to the vendor on that.

So you can smooth out those things over time or over sources.

So you have, uh, returns as a source of volatility.

You have uh inflows. So volatility you would ideally want to do something that they were they were thinking well okay.

Uh great. So these are just a and re-emphasize some of the ideas that we just share with you.

So uh, on income from volatile publicly owned resources most directly enter the form first.

This is the ideal characteristics of a good stabilization fund.

You must be simple and transparent. The public should be able to easily replicate the calculations for yearly guaranteed transfers.

But if it is just, you know, a very shadowy rule that nobody really understands, then you might undermine the credibility of the of the fund.

It might end up something like, well, describing Kazakhstan and it's easy to you change it because yeah, nobody will notice.

Yeah.

A reduce uncertainty by yielding a, a level of guarantee transfers for the following year that is not heavily dependent on present circumstances.

Again ideally we want to be able to mitigate both good and bad times.

A and the fund must avoid procedure quality by observing volatility of inflows,

including commodities A as well as financial markets A and is mountain outflows A?

It ideally will yield a level of guaranteed transfers that is perceived as temporarily fair by the recipient,

which prevent them from finding an excuse to change the rule or to break it.

A and these are good characteristics of a saving funds.

These are stabilization. This is savings.

And we just as three things I love the funds balance a and the level of future transfers to grow exponentially yields a level of

guaranteed transfer that does not overheat the economy and allocate portfolio investments to maximize the long term returns.

And one more story assign a stable share of liquid investments for additional stabilization purposes.

So again, these are just some characteristics. This is not comprehensive.

But the the one thing we want you to to to keep in mind is how these factors interact together.

So if you have natural resource is this a source of volatility for your fiscal uh balance if this is a fiscal.

So separately for your fiscal balance, how does exactly this discount manage this if at all?

What are the rules that are in place? A when a having to decide how much to spend, how much A to save and so forth.

Right. So these are just the characteristics that you might want to consider when exploring your own country.

Now I will very briefly talk about debt sustainability a unless there is any question about this part.

So again, commodity exporters try to think about these dimensions.

A fiscal a if the fiscal area appears to be an issue for your country, a debt sustainability, I would want you to keep some basic questions in mind.

So the first question would be when exploring debt dynamics, right.

What is the debt trajectory. And then you want to ask maybe what kind of debt it is right.

Who issue it was the government was the central government.

Where where a state a I don't know, state governments where a is always a homeland, right.

Is this from domestic borrowers? Is this from external borrowers in what currency it is denominated.

Is this in dollars? Is this in national currency?

A under what legislation was this sold in the New York Stock Exchange, or was this sold on the domestic bond market?

A when is it due? How this impacts my what we call a the gross financing needs.

That is how much I need to operate to run the government.

A and that is basically a the budget that also includes the debt service, not only interest payments but also amortization.

So these are some relevant questions.

And then what is driving the change in depth. What is a a either helping the debt A to B reduce or increasing the debt.

So I will very quickly show you.

Just as an example. Uh, okay.

Let's. So here.

There is a whole section. This is what I wanted to show you.

That might be very useful for you.

This is the annex to. Here it is. So this is annex two.

It is a sovereign risk and debt sustainability analysis.

It would be worked through taking a look at this.

So it has a lot of information.

But it might be it might have answers to some of the questions that we just pose.

For instance. This first chart here tells us from the beginning a first what?

What is the trajectory of the debt, right? Or what has been the trajectory of the debt in the in the recent years?

Right. It also tells us what is the composition of the debt, foreign currency, local currency.

It also tells us who lent. So these are external private creditors, external official creditors, domestic creditors and so forth.

Right. It also tells us under what a jurisdiction is that is.

It also tells us a what kind of instruments are used.

Are these bonds that can be sold, that can be sold in the market, or are this a loans from the world Bank?

Right. It also tells us what is the maturity of the debt.

So a when it is when the debt is due.

So it might be the case that you might have a.

Case for a cash flow problem. Imagine that a a big chunk of your debt is due to expire in the next three years.

And the price of oil A is down and you're at oil exporter.

So you might be in trouble. A and this a just to conclude A this is part a show.

You show us what is driving the change in debt.

So this this chart is just decomposing a what is pushing up or pushing down the debt to GDP ratio.

Okay. Again this might be useful for understanding a how a this is changing.

And finally you will have the typical A chart a like a which under a considering certain assumptions.

It tells you what is the likely path that debt will follow in the future.

So we just have these resource in mind as you dive into your fiscal analysis.

A and here I will go back to the example of of South Africa.

This is, you see, an increase in a debt to GDP trajectory.

A this is general government debt. A and then we see that a the increase mainly came from marketable bonds.

So that's emissions that the a central in the general government made a we see that uh most of the debt here.

Well in this case here in 2019 was a more than ten years, a very little or a short term debt.

A and this is just. The equation that Ricardo presented and in essence, the core of that sustainability, which is the change in depth,

is equal just to the to the interest that you're paying on your past debt, a minus the deficit that you have in.

So. Here. We want to.

There are several things that play a role.

Your rate of growth, the interest rate that you're paying for your debt, the adjustment that you're doing in the fiscal end.

So all these things come together in this puzzle and will determine what the trajectory of that's.

A. And in essence, that sustainability analysis is just a, a tool that we use a to assess a debt situation in a country.

Maturity rates a and identify vulnerabilities in debt structure or policy framework to advance correction.

So we made some assumptions. That is we have some projections.

A this is say GDP growth fiscal results inflation exchange rate, that interest rate.

And we perform sensitivity analysis a.

Under some assumptions that allows us to see what the trajectory of the Dip is.

And this is pretty much what I just show you here. A what is the likelihood of the dead?

Going where? Right. This this thing here. So this is the the debt to GDP ratio of Pakistan.

And this is how a it might evolve.

And then there are some scenarios that in the text you might find more details.

A another concept that I forgot to incorporate here but it's very relevant and

is there is how a depreciation or a devaluation affects your fiscal position.

So if you have a lot of foreign debt a and then you evaluate, then you need more a, a local currency to pay for the same amount of a foreign currency.

So that that is something that you might also want to consider.

A. So yeah, this is just a description of the exercise.

There is a two. This is a spreadsheet that you could dig into if you want,

in which you can perform at DSA as the one that is shown in the in the in the report a just you have some assumptions a some priors.

And then based upon that you conducted a DSA analysis a some signs that you are heading towards a fiscal crisis.

Verse eight take a look at debt to GDP ratios, current and projections.

So if debt to GDP ratio is increasing, as in the case of South Africa, you might say that this is a sort of source of concern.

If you saw that the debt to GDP ratio was an average on the last 20 years,

40% or less, and then you start seeing a steady increase in the debt to GDP ratio.

Something is happening. And you want to understand that something in debt service to GDP.

Again, if you are a if you are a commodities porter, the prices are down.

A you are doing a fiscal adjustment, right.

You try to cut spending and expenses to raise some taxes that the shares.

Of the debt services. Your balance is killing you.

And this is a why. Typically you have primary balance and then overall balance because you could have a surplus in your operations as the government.

But you have kind of have a deficit if you are paying a lot of interest.

Right. So understanding what is the weight of the debt service in the GDP in your fiscal balance is super important.

A you also might want to explore not only debt service to GDP, but debt service to revenues.

This is how much taxes a would I need in order to pay for for my revenues.

And again, if it is the case that we're talking about royalties or taxes that come from a some commodity sources, and if they are volatile,

how these A plays A or Interplays together with that right A then we can look at prices that is that deals a sovereign risk.

And we have also investor interests that might be captured by downgrading credit ratings,

or simply investors exiting your country and not interested in buying your debt.

Okay. So this is again, so that's Rica.

He and this is a debt again. It went from a 81% to 140 in this scenario.

And it goes to 73% on this other scenario.

This passive scenario is not doing anything to change the current trajectory.

The active scenario is what if we implement a some fiscal adjustment.

Okay. This is in essence another DSA.

A this is debt service to revenues. And then you see that at the beginning it was a high.

Then it went to 9%. And then it started increasing again.

This is another way that you can use to see if you can pay for your debt service.

And this is just how much bonds are purchased by nonresidents.

And these are again so that we can bonds. And what is the volume of purchases that a are actually happening at every point.

These are the the ratings and these this is a a minus b b minus b b b b b b minus and so forth.

Right. And then you see that here it becomes riskier and it loses investment grade.

A and this is also captured by by soybean spreads.

This is a CDSS credit default swaps a for five years.

This is the average of emerging markets and this is South Africa.

They were the same here. Now they are very different a all this financial data.

And I was about to to share that with you. You typically will find it in platforms such as Bloomberg.

Yeah. You could also find it in a platform called a S&P capital IQ.

On a we generally have access to a capital IQ through the Baker Library in HBS.

So you can log in. Actually a I left the link here in the PBT.

A you just follow the link. And with your student credentials, you can maybe see a real time picture of how these things look like for your country.

Uh, these are geos. Um, this is the point here is that despite low borrowing rates on the short term, the long term yield curve is its depth.

A and then it might cut to lots of confidence.

Uh, on on a South African assets bear and the government yield curve has become steeper reflecting investor concerns about fiscal sustainability.

That was basically the point that was making this ten years and older.

You can see 2 to 3 years. A and here are the things that I wanted to show you.

Uh, yeah. Now we have the case study.

We have 15 minutes a I leave you the station to you, but I want just to show you this quickly.

It's. Here.

Okay, so you can get access, uh, students.

And then, uh, you just go here and you can again take a look at the the price of the bones,

of the bones of your country, the breadth of your country, the seeds of your country.

And that might be informative again, if this is something relevant to your country.

Yeah. That's it. Okay.

Thank you. Now I leave the floor to you because, uh, you have the slides in canvas, and we're going to do this case together.

In fact, you are going to do it, and I'm just going to react.

Um, so, um, does everyone raise your hand if you're looking at the slides just to have, uh, sense?

Okay. Only three people. Um, but you can I mean, do you have your the slides or not?

Okay. So let's give a second for people to get the slides.

Uh, you can join in groups if you don't have the slides for the person right next to you has them.

So I'll give 30s to that.

And then just the exercise will be the first five minutes go through, uh, the case study and try to understand what the [INAUDIBLE] is going on.

That's the prompt. What happened?

What is the current situation? What's the future look like?

No googling. Is.

No. Looks like.

I get this? This one.

There's about ten slides or so, so try to keep that in mind.

And the injunction? Jesus Christ.

Just. And then this.

2017. Okay, three minutes left.

And whenever you're ready, you can raise your hand. This is not one.

To comply. Sure don't get there on.

Second part. It's not the super.

This. Two minutes.

Is that crazy? This.

Complete passage. You're this are your own.

They're in service of this. Is increasing.

So when you see. One minute.

Okay. This is an.

There's a principle. I think so.

Do you have a cigaret? Practitioners implement.

And the kindness made. Is anyone ready?

What do we know about certain? Thanks.

So we. Came up with this kind of like even though we don't have we don't have 1998 in the charts, you know.

Okay. Yeah. Yeah. But market is just kind of.

I think the first thing which I saw slide 52, when did, uh,

the current spending of the capital spending almost the capital spending rises and the current spending goes down.

Uh, tax revenue rises. The wages and pensions, they go down sharply up to June 15th.

So the I mean, the nature of spending changes from current spending to sort of when, uh, 2015, I think it starts to jump 15.

Okay. So can can we stay there. Let's stay in 2015 and ask the question, what happened before 2015?

What was the situation before 2015? Physically.

There seems to have been some sort of structural change to the balance sheet and fiscal operations around that time.

But what happened before?

But before basically like cream spending way higher than, um, the capitalists, it means that the government was spending more.

Not really invest. Okay, so they were spending more on just ordinary operations than CapEx.

That's that's usual for this, the usual thing to do.

And but what else do you know. Was this sustainable. Was it on sustainable way.

What good signals do we have? What's what slide are you looking at to answer that question?

What do we see in this diagram. If you want this question.

There are a. Look at the changes in your comparative nature.

The primary balance is light shifting. So even though you have the balance is negative, its primary balance is at peace.

Do you think decreasing by equity and the gross debt is also gone?

So what happened with debt. But do we know about that. Yeah.

Let's go to this slide. What can we see here between 2015.

And then it is coming down. How about what happened before 2015.

It's from 2015. There was a spike. And, uh, from 2012 to 15, there was a spike in the debt.

And then from 2015 on, researchers, whatever decomposition.

Almost no terms. Uh, short term debt, um, that increase.

But this is my short term debt of. What do we know about short term debt?

Why do governments start issuing short term debt?

What you need at that point of time.

Okay, so we might you know, this island over here is kind of like an early warning sign that something is going on.

Okay. So yes, that is growing and that, you know, that has bad implications.

Uh, but also at some point,

your ship's shifting the composition of your bed structure because you cannot issue more at the maturity levels than you wanted.

And the market is just not giving you the liquidity and the, uh, maturity.

So you have to go to new short term market. That is a bad sign.

And then after 2015, it starts to go down.

So why would that why would that and short term debt start to go down after 2015.

What do you actually happens? You've come into the picture.

Huh? Did I come into the business? So that's a hypothesis.

We would have to check if there was an IMF program, but it sure looks like it.

All right. Um. Uh, so what happened? How did the losses.

So let's say they did a fiscal consolidation, right?

You can you can see the fiscal consolidation happening here.

The overall balance was pretty negative. And then it flipped.

But before the overall balance flipped the primary balance it started to improve in 2015.

And then it went into a surplus in 2016.

So, um, um, you know, there was definitely a fiscal consolidation.

But what form do you think? Who took the loss? Of course, because seeing raises come bearing on you.

Raise your hand. There is a sale.

Can you? It's like, um.

Because we see, like 52 that there is really a dip in wages in this one.

