[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Oh, yes. Oh. Where are the flags, guys?

Um. Uh, these guys are not bringing it.

Come on. Um, have to them to the presentation.

Thank. You for that.

You have to do something even more special. Like two big flags across the entire border.

Yeah. And gave us an idea, uh.

For each of you dressed up as the flag. Like. Wearing the colors.

Head to toe, don't you? Think.

And I. I bless, get in and.

No, I don't want to live anywhere else. Good.

You. Know when you're going to get another one.

You're not able to get away from.

It. So this is tricky as I said.

Okay. Can you tell me. Why I should say that?

I saying that you have to understand. Yeah.

Yeah. I know, I know.

I know what I'm talking about.

So I can't say that if I have no.

Orders. Hello?

Hello. So, uh, we spent a lot of time, uh, in this, um, in these last couple of weeks, uh, talking about diagnostics and diagnostic tools.

Um, how can you figure out what the [INAUDIBLE] is going wrong in a particular place?

How do you ask the question? How do you nest? Different possible explanations, kind of.

Aim and so on. But before I go there, let me just remind you about the AirPods.

And let me just remind you of you a few things here. So Thursday I'm going to be lecturing on the sense of us.

And for me to be able to lecture on the sense of us, you have to complete your survey.

I hope you had some fun completing the survey.

Um, and then, uh, uh, there's going to be a review session as to, you know, um, some examples of final presentations.

This Friday, on Tuesday, we're going to have an example of, uh, growth diagnostics of the growth lab.

Um, um, on Tuesday, December 3rd, we're going to have.

A, you know, a discussion on the practice of, uh, growth diagnostics.

And, um, Thursday, I'm going to bear with you.

Goodbye. And not for long, because then on Monday, we're going to have the final presentations Monday, December 9th.

So that's the agenda we are in the last couple of weeks of the course and, uh, it's, uh, it will be that.

So so today in we're going to try to move from uh, diagnostics to therapeutics, right.

The idea is that if you have a good diagnostic and a good diagnostic is not just a set of a list of observations or a list of symptoms,

it's an explanation of why those symptoms are there. It's the difference between having a fever and being diagnosed with Covid or something.

Right. So it's more it's more precise about the mechanism.

Then once you understand the mechanism that is causing the problem,

then you can think about ways in which you might act on the problem so that you can affect some kind of deeper change.

So that's why many people tell us, oh, we are tired about diagnostics.

We have diagnosed everything and the typical diagnostic is just a list of symptoms.

Okay. So I'm going to start by reminding you what we want to.

Describe as a syndrome which is kind of like the disease.

And then how you want to go from diagnostics to therapeutics.

And I'm going to illustrate that with a couple of examples. Okay.

Am in South Africa. So. So our strategy has always been, you know,

you have to first start with formulating or growth question what is what is what is it that you think that that merits attention?

So is it low growth? Is it unsustainable growth?

Is it a particularly unbalanced growth or non-inclusive growth?

Whatever your question is, then you nest all these possible explanations of the problem in a decision tree.

Then you go down the decision tree and try to figure out which ones are more likely to be the case.

Once you finish that process, you have to stop and ask yourself a question why the [INAUDIBLE] am I observing what I am observing?

And that is the step of the syndrome where you have to posit a syndrome.

Okay, then you want to test whether if the syndrome was true, what else should I be observing?

What other testable implications emerge from the fact that you are observing the syndrome?

And then a then you iterate, and that's going to hopefully allow you to, uh, to make, uh, a deeper understanding.

So the first question you want to ask yourself is why would syndromes be persistent?

The typical thing is to say, look at this.

The problem in this country is, I don't know, let's say electricity.

Okay. But everybody suffering from lack of electricity, their shortages, their stuff.

Why the [INAUDIBLE] would electricity be that the problem, I mean, and nobody was waiting for you to tell them.

So now that you know, why has the problem not gone away?

Why? Why is it so persistent? Why? Why is it hard to change?

Why? Why is it maybe in some kind of an equilibrium.

So. So it's unlikely that things got stuck waiting for your study.

And now that your studies out, everybody is clear. You.

There must be what you're telling societies that there are some elements that are being under provided they have very high social returns.

If you provided more, you will see a lot of good action. Well, why can't society get its act together and just provide them?

So you have to ask yourself the question, why does the syndrome persist?

And I'm going to be listening as you present on Monday the ninth.

You know, not whether you have identified some kind of a syndrome and or whether you just I have a set of, of, of symptoms.

Okay. So sometimes it's interesting, you know people.

People. And they often and they say, well, okay, so why is this problem here.

Say the problem is lack of electricity. And so then you'll say, well, you know, that's because there are maybe some powerful interest groups.

So you're saying not. The problem is that there's some powerful interest groups.

That's why your problem persists okay.

Am. And so a.

So if you if you are going to tell me, you know, this thing is I don't know the problem in this country's education.

And the problem of education is the teacher's union.

And the teachers union is a concentrated group that has its interest above the interest of society,

and they are holding society back and making it up.

Okay, then aim. And the question would be how?

How does this group exert its power? Why is it there?

Why can society not overcome that or whatever. So.

So if if you are going to tell me ultimately a group about a story about some interest

group in society that has privileges that are preventing good things from happening,

you have to tell me, how is it that they are able to maintain that equilibrium?

Why are they not kicked out naturally? Oh.

Uh, so, um, it has become somewhat of a habit among among some, some people to think that the which a little bit is,

uh, I don't know if it's not first cousins of of conspiracy theories.

It's like the twin brother of conspiracy theories that everything that happens happens because there's some ultimate interest out there,

some evil power out there. And this evil power is, is is what's causing the problem.

So, um, you want to ask yourself a question if that's so elaborate?

Um, but sometimes the problem is not interest groups, but ideas and, um, aim ideas.

You know, societies might, uh, do things because they honestly think that it's they have a theory of the world where those ideas make sense.

So, for example, in a big energy.

I don't know, 20 years ago did a study in India about infant mortality.

And, you know, there's very high incidence of infant mortality in, in, in India.

And it's typically associated with dysentery and, you know, intestinal diseases, infections.

And it typically comes from water. Right. So infected water.

Okay. So very high death rates. Now there's a well known technology to deal with uh, to deal with uh dysentery.

Hay. And it's called uh.

Something hydration. What? Uh, hydration.

Hydration. Repair.

Sorry. Oral rehydration. Oral rehydration salts.

Okay, so it's very clear. So if, uh, kid has, um, this is very.

You give them oral rehydration therapy. You give them more water with some salts.

Now, there are many parents that don't want to give water to a kid with dysentery because they think they have a theory of the world that,

you know, the problem of dysentery is that the body becomes like a thief.

So if you put water on the top, it comes out of the bottom. So if you stop giving water at the top, water at the bottom will mostly boil.

And he did a survey. And 35% of people in India believe that if your kid has dysentery, you should not give them water.

Okay. So that might be an equilibrium if you want.

And there's a theory of the world where that makes sense. It's just the wrong theory of the world.

But, you know, it makes sense. So. So people might have beliefs.

For example, people might have beliefs that, uh, foreigners are substitutes of local workers.

And if you allow more foreigners in employment than wages of the locals are scoring, you know,

maybe the alternative theory of the world is that foreigners are complements,

or that there is an alternative migration policy that would make foreigners complements.

And so the more foreigners you look in, the higher the employment and wages of the locals.

Well, which theory of the world is right? This, you know, is open for discussion.

So sometimes you might find yourself in a situation where, you know, some equilibrium is held together by wrong beliefs.

We we would love most of the cases to be that way, because then with just ideas, we can change the world.

Right? And you know, we come up with better ideas.

End of story. We're home for, you know, so, you know, sometimes a beliefs might be self-fulfilling.

So you might have the situation where, you know, there's a general perception in society that the only people who go to a public sector are corrupt.

Right. And if that's the case, that will be self-fulfilling, because the only people who would want to go to the public sector and pay this,

this penalty in terms of, in terms of social prestige and appreciation, are those that plan to steal.

So if that's society's belief, you might be in an equilibrium where it's very hard to get out because you cannot suddenly start by saying,

suppose that they were not corrupt because they are corrupt.

You know, so. So, um, so interest based stories, you know, um, so, for example, uh, when I did the first, my first, uh,

South Africa project being from 2005 to 2008, um, I worked with feedback from my peers, Brown and Johanne Fedak.

They, they wanted to study the idea that a lack of competition was, um,

was the problem that they really Pragyan was working in those days on his, uh, schumpeterian growth theory.

And in some Pythagorean growth theory,

you have this complicated relationship between competition and innovation that if you have too much competition,

there are no ready to finance innovation. And if there is too little competition, there's no incentive to innovate.

So there's there's kind of like, um, um, an inverted U curve in the relationship between innovation and competition.

One metric of, of competition is markups.

So they found that the markups in, in price markups in in South Africa were high by by world standards, about 50% above world standards.

And that the industries with higher markups, uh, exhibited lower productivity growth.

Yes. Was this only for non-tradable?

Uh, that's a great question. That's a great question. A and can you elaborate?

So, uh, the idea being that for tray tables, because it's an international marketplace,

that firms would have to lower their markups to be able to compete internationally,

right, even on the import market, because they are they are not the sole world supplier.

Right. So um, and.

So their, their story was that a lack of productivity growth was lack of competition.

And, and you might want to ask yourself what makes competition persistent.

So one possible story is that there were sanctions against the South Africa, uh, during the time of, of, uh, apartheid.

And so, you know, people could not sell to South Africa.

They could not invest in South Africa. So so that meant that the incumbent firms faced less competition.

Okay. Um. So but then you would ask yourself, okay, but that was until 1992, 93.

We are now in 2008. So what's the story?

Some story of persistence, of monopoly power, etc. in it.

Some people were asking, okay, maybe it's because trade policy is very protectionist.

So these high markups are sustained by high protection in the tradable sector.

And the non-tradable sector would be easier. Right.

Another story is that in a when when the transition happened in the most advanced parts of the economy, the finance sector,

the mining sector decided on a deal which they called black economic empowerment,

which implied that they would assure that a certain fraction of shares, board positions and senior management would be.

Occupied by. Africans, not by Africans, by blacks in South Africa.

And the term blacks includes Africans, coloreds and Indians.

So it's, uh. Black is more encompassing than Africans.

So what they did is, um, a they decided that 25% of the shares of a company should be owned by.

Black people. So they had an incentive to give away 25% of the shares.

By the way, when the African National Congress learned about this private sector initiative, they were sort of like self protecting.

So let's bring them in so that they don't expropriate us.

That was sort of like the deal. Ehm. Ehm.

Eh? The African National Congress made it into a national law and impose it on everybody across the board in all sectors of society.

So. So here you have, you know, 25% of equity was going to be transferred to blacks.

Now notice that the rule doesn't say to how many blacks or to which blacks.

So if you transfer, if all of the 25% of the uh, equity of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange,

which is probably the largest stock exchange as a share of GDP in the developing world, um.

You could transfer it to just one black.

And maybe you want to transfer it to a black that has a lot of political power, so he can provide you with a lot of protection.

So what them.

What Jim Robinson did in this project is he took the listings of all the board members of all the companies listed in the Johannesburg Stock Exchange,

and the number of people on the boards was incredibly small, and many companies chose the same people on the board.

Right. So their argument is that you had created.

So I mean, Cyril Ramaphosa, the current president, became a billionaire almost overnight.

He was the head of the unions. So who better to be on the board than, you know,

to give him not to give them 25% of your shares than somebody who suddenly will have incentives aligned with you?

So the idea is that black economic empowerment might have made more durable some powers of the incumbents.

That was their story. Okay. So you see, whenever you ask yourself these questions, you know what makes it persistent?

You might come up with complicated stories. I don't know that I buy any of them.

But, you know, just to tell you, if that's your theory, then your your theory of change is going to be a buy.

I do buy the idea that this way of, of doing black economic empowerment is very much about creating a black elite, a black super elite.

So I coined the phrase that black economic empowerment is more about making the top of society black than making the bottom of society better.

And so and that there was some trade off between action at the top and action at the bottom.

So anyway. But. So depending on what you think is the is the underlying theory, your action space is completely different.

If you tell me that it's all about trade policy, we are in one space, right?

If you tell me it's all about in your vested interest of these large companies and so on that have now been in trends, it's a different story than.

Um, when you get to a story like this one.

I guess the challenge is then being able to run any sort of analysis to, to prove it.

So what I guess when you get to this story, which seems plausible, what's your next step after that analytically.

Right. So a so that's why when you come up with a story, you need to come up with testable implications about the story.

So so you would ask yourself a question in which circumstances would this be more acute.

So would it be more acute in the context of natural monopolies than in the context of like for saying tradable,

where there's likely to be more more competition, more contestable market, etc.?

So I would observe something like camels and hippos right to, to test for that.

So that's that's why you're always asking yourself if this were true, what else would I be observing?

Okay. So for example, um, it's a many societies believed for a long time that if you allowed a private sector involvement and competition in telecoms,

prices would go up,

because now you would have the private sector instead of having a public utility that wants to do good for people and include everybody.

If you have the private sector, they'll want to make money. And so prices will go up.

And and this was put to a referendum in Uruguay.

And, uh, and the Hawaiians, which are incredibly reasonable people by Argentinian or Brazilian standards.

Uh, you see the Chileans laugh for the others.

It might be too subtle. Yeah, but they were always this small country next to these two alcoholics, and I never saw them.

But it was put to the vote and a constitutional amendment to prohibit a, um, privatization of telecoms in Uruguay.

And it won by a landslide. And, and it delayed, uh, you know, the whole deployment of cellphone technology in Uruguay by a lot.

And that's, that's a belief that it was, you know, it's a theory of the world.

Ehm. For example, ehm, do cash transfers, conditional cash transfers and have good impacts?

Well before they started.

You know, the argument was they have giving money away makes no sense about the way it was done with, with, uh, you know, recipes and stuff.

It was able not only to convince the Mexican polity to do it, but then to convince the world Bank to do it,

and then for the world Bank to peddle it everywhere in the world. Right.

So when sometimes, you know, ehm, there's some evidence in some place that they work.

You know, you know enough about statistics and econometrics to ask a question about external validity, right?

That if you offer conditional cash transfers in Norway, would that work in in any significant way?

Or if you try to do them in a country where the average level of income of the country is below $2 a day,

and who's going to be paying the conditional cash transfer? So so you might ask yourself, well, you may not travel that way,

but the fact that it had a lot of evidence behind it made it into such a unimportant equilibrium in Mexico that every president.

Changes the name of the program. And now now it's completely discontinued.

Or they make it or completely discontinued. Completely discontinued.

And why is that popular? That's interesting. Now they can you.

Know they can be completely discontinued. And it's like unconditional, unconditional, unconditional transfers.

No. What they did is they eliminated the conditionality, but they didn't take the money away from people.

And then they eliminated the conditionality. So they became a little bit more populist in the management of the program.

So before you had to take your kids to school or take them to health care.

So it was kind of if you behave responsibly, vis-a-vis your, your children, then that had a little bit paternalistic component.

But it was started during a time sucking Salinas authority.

It was kept by a so you know, if necessary, you know, it was kept by de la Rosa and Fox and Calderon.

It was kept by Calderon. It was kept by Pena Nieto.

So so you see the and every, every one of these are six years.

So it's a 30 year. And then these guys eliminate the conditionality.

But so it's now it's embedded. There's no one who can touch it.

Everyone changes the name. Everyone changes the name.

So I can say that there's this new program but. Now under provided public utilities is a common thing.

Okay. So many countries are really lousy at providing public utilities, especially electricity.

And you might want to ask yourself a question. Um, why now?

Oftentimes it's not because they don't spend enough money in the sector.

So in in country after country, in the Dominican Republic and in Nigeria, here I that I mentioned,

governments typically spend more money subsidizing electricity than they spend in education or health.

So it becomes a huge drag on the budget. I don't know about your countries.

It's, uh, interesting question to ask. Now, at the same time, you have other places.

For example, the city of Medellin has a superbly run, a public utility.

And when Colombia decided to. Uh, to open up the utility sector to private investment.

This municipally owned company is owned by the city of municipally owned company decided to to participate

in those and those same bids and it it became um national company and then it became a multinational.

Today it's a multinational. They own transmission assets in their in Brazil and in Peru, and they own distribution companies in Central America.

And they own generation plants. And so they are a multinational.

They're super profitable. They make like $1 billion a year in, in, in profits.

And, and they, they have a very disciplined policy.

They send like 500 and $600 million a year to the city government of Marion.

And the city government of Meridian has been able to transform the city on the back of these dividends paid by this municipality owned company.

And you may ask yourself the question, why the [INAUDIBLE] do I go right next door into the Dominican Republic?

Well, you know, Dominican Republic is more merengue and and Colombia is more,

um, but you're not done and, you know, salsa, but so it's all Latin music.

It's subtle differences in Latin music, radical differences in performance.

Yeah. And you might ask yourself the question, why the [INAUDIBLE].

Right. Why the [INAUDIBLE] it's not in. Why would you have those those differences.

So a very often the reason why you have problems with electricity is this time inconsistency

problem or this credibility problem that a electricity distribution is a natural monopoly.

So it's either going to be a highly regulated private monopoly or a public monopoly.

The the, the investment structure is that you have to pay a big fixed cost upfront to set up the thing,

and then you need a long period of positive cash flows to pay back your initial investment.

Okay. So period one you say bye bye to a lot of money.

Period two you're waiting for that money to come back. Okay.

When you have these problems over time, say you are the government regulating the private monopoly.

You want to tell them this is going to be the safest place in the world, the safest investment in the world.

Just invest and put your money in. And once they've put their money in, there are sitting duck.

They cannot take the investment out. It's sunk investment.

And so your choice now is a do.

Does the public pay a high price or do they pay a low price.

You say, well, if they pay a high price, these guys are going to make money on their investment.

But who cares if I set a low price, everybody's happy and these guys got screwed, but they don't vote or they don't have too many votes.

Okay, so you can see why there might be an equilibrium where everybody agrees that electricity should be cheap,

that stealing electricity should be kind of a right, right.

So and so then electricity prices are low, eh?

Collecting on your on your sales is difficult.

So expected cash flows are low. Nobody invests in that thing.

Only the government would do it, but at a loss. Right.

So in the end, you end up with a sector that cannot recoup its investment money through its cash flow.

And that would be a problem of time inconsistency in this thing.

The way people have thought this would solve that problem is the same way they solve the problem of time.

Inconsistency in monetary policy.

What did they do for that? They created an agency out, which is gonna take the governments out of the central banks.

Okay, so you grant autonomy to the central bank, right?

So you give a central bank autonomy. You give the decision power to an entity that is not trapped in this short term political game.

So the idea has been to create these independent regulators, who are the ones who are going to set up the price, etc., set up the regulatory regime.

And presumably they are appointed to long terms, you know, staggered appointments so that the board doesn't change too quickly.

So governments cannot influence those policies too much.

And that kind of if it works, it gives guarantees to the investors that prices are going to be reasonable.

As a consequence, they're going to be willing to invest at a lower risk premium, so at a lower cost of capital.

So if it works, you might end up with lower prices,

because now investors don't demand as high an interest rate because the perception of risk is lower.

But if you start if you start a game playing with it.

Then investment is going to stop or it's going to demand very high returns.

And unfortunately, this is the mistake that was done both in Colombia and in Mexico.

Pedro, the first thing he did is he started to question these inflation indexation clauses in in in highways.

And and he he he wanted to take powers away from the electric electricity regulatory

agency and what imploded in Mexico is he he destroyed the whole regulatory process.

And now there's zero private investment in electricity in Mexico.

Even though a the reform a was the reform that I'm going to try to do was thrown back by the Supreme Court.

So in principle the sector is open, but there's no trust.

And the private equity investors that went into producing generation in Mexico, all those investments they tell me worked out well,

they got their cash flow, etc. they would like to sell off to return money to private equity investors.

But nobody wants to buy those assets because they don't trust the government.

So that's so you can see how very easily these sectors can get into trouble.

So good. Now interestingly, I'm going to talk about this later on in the, um.

The world Bank has been pushing privatization of electricity companies as well as the solution.

And in particular, they push that solution into Albania.

So they had a lousy public electricity company privatized.

Now, the way I have described the problem. A good privatization, solve it.

Elaborate. Well, the way you describe it.

Not necessarily, but I don't know enough about Albania to know if they have sufficient trust levels in the government.

So, yes. I mean, taking the example of Russia, maybe a decision can goes to.

And also following the example that you and you gave of South Africa, that the private can also be part of the leader pool.

Yeah. I'd like the sector control of that of being a good idea.

Okay. So in the case of, of Russia, it meant that it led to oligarchs, right.

That made money out of monopoly power and so on in some sense.

Um, the problem in the electricity I was describing was a problem where profits are too low to justify investment,

too low and too uncertain to justify investment. So a if, if it was monopolized and the Russian oligarchs making a lot of money,

in some sense it means that we might be in a second best with incentives to some incentives to invest because.

Because the sector is profitable. Yeah, that.

So I think the winning of the program, I mean, if there are enemies investment on generation you can stream to, uh, duration from the public sector.

I mean, you can public tender generation and you can, uh, insurance, the insurance, the, the, the payments to the private companies.

And then in the state, you will have incentives to try to do a connection because there's a gap that you have to finance.

Okay. So so you, you privatize generation, uh, and you give guarantees to the private generators, but who's going to pay for, for for that generation?

Well, in any of these things, there's the generator has to sell to the transmitter and to do the distribution.

Right. So if you have messed up distribution, the distribution company cannot recoup its costs.

So you're talking about a distribution company that is broke.

So when these generation companies want to invest private sector efficient they go to HBS and stuff.

Uh, you know, the investment banks are going to say what is the counterparty risk here?

And he's saying, look, if you are selling to a monopoly that is broke and we have no options to sell to anybody else.

So if you are in a super risky environment, so even if the private sector wish they could invest,

the investment banks are going to either demand a super high interest rate or something.

Now you're saying, well, let's have a public sector, a government guarantee.

Those government guarantees are the reason why in Nigeria and in the Dominican Republic,

they spend more money in electricity subsidies than in education or health.

And that you end up you call that privatization.

But, uh, in the end, the payoff is is the government.

No. So so you see why things can can get into trouble.

What happened in this case, in Albania is that the they privatized the company.

And so now Albanians decided and it was a Czech company.

Uh, Albanians decided if now the company is they were really bad payers of electricity.

If now the company is a foreign company, I'm even more entitled not to pay my electricity bill.

So the cash flow of the electricity company collapsed and the electricity company went to a government with the keys of the company saying,

you take it over, I don't want it. And they sued the government for $100 million and they won.

So, so, so much for that.

Some. This is another case.

Ehm ehm an under taxing state.

So you decide. Look, in Guatemala tax revenues are 9% of GDP with 9% of GDP.

You know you cannot provide education, you cannot provide health, you cannot provide infrastructure, you cannot provide security.

It's just too small of tax base.

Ehm, now in this equilibrium, the rich say, you know, there's no education, there's no health, there's no infrastructure, there's no security.

Why the [INAUDIBLE] would I pay taxes? In some sense, it's a self-fulfilling prophecy, you know?

Um, and the idea is that if they were to pay taxes, the government would use that money to give education, not to them,

because they go to private education to give health care, not to them because they go to private health care.

Uh, security. Not to them because they have their own guards.

Right. But then you are in this situation where there's not enough public goods to support, uh, anything.

And so you are trapped in this bad equilibrium.

So I don't know what you want to consider first best in this environment.

Maybe that some those ex machina more powerful than than the rich in the country are going to impose a higher tax burden.

That's what the development community has tried to do forever.

And, you know, I became chief economist of the IDB in 1994.

I think one of my first trips was to Guatemala. They had just signed the peace agreement.

And the top of the peace agreement was that tax base would go from 9% to 14%, which is still low.

It's been exactly 30 years. Still at 9%.

Okay, so. So you might want to think about alternatives.

What would a second best policy look like? Yes, if.

They can provide the price like this. The goods.

The public goods may be with 9% of taxes. Yes.

I believe they cannot do that. Like they can privatize refurbishing all those.

Well, how do you do that? I mean, how do you privatize your private.

How would you privatize education for the poor or education for the masses?

Or how do you privatize health for the masses? I mean, there's already a private sector in education, but it doesn't reach the poor.

So then, like, not all youth are attracted to the private sector, but like some of them like electricity or like motor.

So so you try to unburden the public sector with some of those responsibilities that that has been tried.

What we proposed is something a little bit different. And, and so you look for public goods that the private sector needs in order to grow.

Okay. And you make the private sector pay for them. So there's a structure in Guatemala where the private sector taxes its own exports.

So the agricultural sector, you know, they have good exports to the US.

Of fruit and stuff. They need sanitary regulations and good agricultural practices certification and and all of these things.

And they need to have the capacity to negotiate state by state access to the U.S. market for future sanitary conditions.

And they give you access to particular months of the year and so on, because they fear insects and stuff.

So it requires a lot of, uh, transaction costs.

So so what they did is they created an institution that deals with the public goods needed by agricultural exports.

And, uh, and that institution is financed by, by a tax on exports.

And the private sector has the government to collect the tax for them and to and to give it to this institution.

So at least they have that little piece of the public goods. They're willing to tax.

Why? Because they see the benefits. They're unwilling to tax pay taxes for other people, but at least they see the benefits there.

And that's interesting that at least that has been a durable solution.

And that one has like 20 years. Or more.

But that's what they call themselves, the experts.

And they reinvest every word. It's a little bit like what happened in Colombia with that was what it was with the coffee growers.

The coffee Federation was upset at the fact that prices of coffee were very volatile, so they wanted to give farmers, um, a more stable price.

And that's fine. When the international price is low, everybody wants to sell to the federation,

but when the price is high, people want to cheat and sell on their own.

So the only way to make that agreement, that agreement requires enforcement, and it's impossible to enforce if the state doesn't help you enforce.

So that's why the Federation called in the government to enforce an agreement between coffee growers, that that's the way they were going to run it.

So sometimes you call in the government because you need enforcement.

The government has supposedly comparative advantage in enforcement and it allows a private sector deal to happen.

So in this case, you ask the government to enforce this tax on exports because you don't want any

free rider among your friends in the private sector to sustain that equilibrium.

Yes. How many percentage points, uh, from DP that's that like that measure uh, help to to bring in taxes.

Insignificant. Yeah. Less than 1% of GDP.

Yeah. So but just to tell you how you want to think about aligning incentives and when you can't impose something tougher.

So um, when you think about therapeutics, there's a tradition of how you want to think about therapeutics.

And one of them a, um, which is very typical among economies.

There's there's a long literature in economics on something that they call optimal policies.

If you if you Google optimal policy or if you Google and Google Scholar so that you only get academic papers,

optimal economic policy rule that you're going to get tens of thousands of papers,

and all those tens of thousands of papers have exactly the same structure.

They write a model in that model has an objective function, say, a social welfare function.

And in that model there are some parameters which are policy parameters.

And then and then what the model is. You solve the model to what are the parameters or what are the policy parameters that maximize social whatever.

Okay. So in this scenario, policies are deduced from a model.

Okay. So you have to ask your secretary what is your model and how can you deduce the policy from from the model.

In reality life is much more complicated.

So, um, yeah, these papers might help you think about the problem, but they are not very good at designing a particular solution.

Here it's important to understand a few things. First, there is a difference between what you might want to call science,

what you might want to call technology, and what you might want to call design.

Okay. Science. Ask questions about the nature of the world okay.

And when you do do economic analysis, you're asking about how what's the nature of the world.

Okay. Same thing in physics or in chemistry and biology.

What's the nature of the world? Technology is about how to change the world, how to do things in the world.

Because presumably you've got the world the way it was and you don't want it the way it is.

You want in a different way. You want to change the world. So that's what technology is about.

And you can think of policies as technologies to change the world.

But design comes in when a the quote unquote technology you want to develop is very complex.

It has many design parameters, many, many interacting design parameters.

We typically when there are many, many interacting design parameters, we don't know how to how to do it.

So one good example is architecture. You think how architects do it.

They know some general parameters of you know, this is the piece of land.

This is the idea is going to be an office building. A.

These are the regulations. This is, you know, the maximum floor area ratio.

And this you know, all the other parameters that urban settings get.

But except for that, the rest is up for grabs, right.

How big should the offices be? How how where you know where which views of should you have.

You know, is it going to be a glass building? Is it going to be a brick building?

Is it going to be you know, there are a thousand possible parameters.

Okay. So, and you don't even know the trade offs between them until you start designing.

So typically what they do is they. They start with some initial solution on the table and then they start evolving it.

So that's design thinking is you start with some design of the solution and then you start, you know, they do these critiques right.

And because and different people, you know, look at the problem from different angles.

And this is and the evolve solution. So I think design thinking is extremely important when you think about policy.

There's no deductive approach to policy because typically most policies are just too complex.

And so you say I'm going to do conditional cash transfer conditional on what who's the

organization that is going to give it in a who has the administrative capacity to implement it.

How do you you know, there's a thousand design procedures.

Yes, I wrote that in the conditional transfer policy that you mentioned from Mexico before.

Example, give the money to the mother and not to the father, because they notice that the father used to treat the kids like that.

So. So that's, that's that's one element of the design that's never going to come out of a model.

So there's a lot of thinking in the process. And anyway so in.

One. You know, one important question is do you want to have strategy precede or follow action?

And there's a very linear way of thinking that first you do diagnostics, then you do therapeutic design.

And then you implement. And once you implement a you implement whatever you designed.

But the problem is that in the process of implementing, a lot of information gets revealed.

That you did not have at the moment of designing.

So so sometimes you don't want to you don't want to delay your actions because you are thinking about your strategy.

Sometimes if you start with actions, you will reveal information that will inform the feasibility of strategies.

Okay? So sometimes if you are sure enough about something, go for it.

And and and you know that you are in the business of learning what is going to work, so you don't know exactly what's going to work.

Okay. So you you learn about the nature of the problem as you act on it.

So for example, we came up with the idea in Albania. I'm going to talk about Albania in a few minutes in that for reasons I'll explain,

we needed to we needed to, uh, to grow exports because we were going to do a big fiscal adjustment.

And fiscal adjustment is not good for demand and shrink domestic demand.

If you don't want the economy to shrink, you want to substitute with foreign demand.

You want to substitute with exports.

So we knew everything that they could potentially export, but we don't know what we could do to enhance those exports.

So we created these black belt pins, these, uh, these, uh, methods, HBS we call them and,

you know, these teams to figure out what obstacles are there to know.

So so the idea is you engage with the private sector trying to figure out what could be done to to enhance those policies.

In the process of doing that, we found out that the Ministry of Economy had a very capable and powerful minister.

The Minister of Agriculture had a very weak minister on top of a super corrupt ministry.

And whenever we try to do something, the people that we were working with in these black belt teams would get fired by the secretary general.

And, and, and they were protecting, uh, an internal mafia that we would not have have, uh, thought about.

So because of that, and Matt Andrews was working with us in that project, we ended up convincing the Prime Minister,

I must confess that he had to reform that ministry,

and maybe to kick out the minister and put somebody with more political power to to change the stuff.

So so you realize that you don't have an organization capable the moment you try to use your organization for your purposes.

And you always want to think about it. You know, many times people want to have the idea of a permanent solution to something.

Sometimes you just want to have a workaround, call that scaffolding and aim in.

You know when you see a beautiful bridge, there's no scaffolding.

But you cannot build a bridge without scaffolding because until the bridge is all complete, the bridge doesn't hold itself.

It has to have something to hold it.

So sometimes when you're thinking of solutions, you cannot build a permanent solution before you build other things around it.

So sometimes these temporary solutions are important steps to the permanent solution.

Okay. So. So now you know, because their kids are taught the Holy Trinity and the Holy Trinity is that you want things that are technically correct,

administratively feasible, and politically supportable.

So here you want to think about that.

When you think about the solutions, you think that this is something that you think is is the right thing to do, but everybody hates it.

Or do you think that if it's if it's the right thing to do, some people would want to support that?

Why would they want to support it? What's in it for them?

Have you created a large enough coalition for change? No.

And would you be able to implement it and so on. Okay.

So here's the example of Albania. So I got involved in Albania in August 2013.

I had received requests to go to Albania before that,

but it was coming from people in the opposition and I typically don't get involved in electoral campaigns.

I only get involved with governments once they're in governments, because there are fewer of governments than, than than parties, right?

There's more more than one competitor in an election. So I'm.

You say, well, I know I'll get involved. Officially, when there's a government there.

So a now a there was a guy, an authoritarian guy that had been in power for about ten years in.

A he he organized the election and tried to create a boom during the election by running unsustainable fiscal policies.

He didn't have the money to pay, so he was financing it through arrears.

So he was not paying contractors. So there was a big accumulation of arrears to contractors which owed money to the banks.

Okay. So in. A so there was a big accumulation of non-performing loans in banks of contractors that had sold stuff to government that were not paid.

Okay. In addition, there was a high current account deficit and Europe was not in its best moment.

It was in the middle of a European crisis. And in addition, they had an electricity crisis.

And, you know, the private company, private electricity company had had there had left the country and left the company back in government hands.

So so what do you do? We thought there were there was a potential fiscal crisis.

The government has lost access to finance and was funding itself with with arrears.

So that's very bad potential banking crisis.

If people get scared that the old. Banks are not recovering their loans so banks may go under.

You may attack the banks, you may attack the currency.

And in addition you may have an electricity crisis. So you have a potentially large set of interacting crises.

So so what we did was we said, look.

Let's deal first with a fiscal problem, the fiscal problem.

We have to bring the fiscal accounts back to balance. We need a fiscal reform.

Let's go to the IMF. Let's get money from the IMF in exchange for fiscal reform.

Let's use the money for the IMF to pay the guys who have non-performing loans in the banking system.

So we clear the banking system with that loan. Okay.

And so we solve the problem. So we get rid of a fiscal deficit.

We get rid of the banking problem. We deal a little bit with a unfunded balance of payments, because we get money from the IMF.

And we signal to the markets that now we are better.

So you should start lending to us. But that had the implication that a fiscal contraction means less domestic dynamism.

So A we need to compensate with a source of demand and a source of demand is exports.

And this was, uh, the export basket of, um, of Albania, a lot of.

Agricultural products and some minerals. Okay.

So we looked at the new products in Albania.

They were relatively few new products compared to other countries, in other words, in the region.

So monkeys were not jumping.

And in these new products represented very little in terms of new exports per capita, just $56 and just $150 million in new stuff.

And this was the new stuff that was coming out. So exports were underperforming.

Um, three sources of new business models in Albania.

Uh, you know, uh, in general, you know, migrants might be a source of, of innovation, right?

FDI might be a source of innovation. Diasporas might be a source of innovation.

So we looked into each one. Nobody was going to go living in Albania.

So, you know, I mean, it was the North Korea of Europe.

Nobody wanted to go to to Albania, right?

There was aim and all the are all the foreigners in Albania were actually the sons of, of uh, Albanians that went to Greece.

So all the foreigners in Albania were born in Greece.

Right. So foreign direct investment.

Um, uh, it was relatively high because there were some very few concentrated investments.

So a, a very few companies investing in very few countries investing in, in, in FDI while compared to say in Romania,

it was uh, compared to a region, there was much more FDI activity in the region.

So, um. So that's the the situation.

So we got the fiscal under control. We got some additional revenues from additional resources from the IMF.

That also signaled our intention. And then we've focused on our growth strategy.

And the growth strategy has to be focused on exports. So which exports.

We started to look into them all and let's look into all of them.

So we don't know which or what's holding them back.

So let's start working with all of them. And that's this idea that you may not want to wait until you have more information before you act right.

And in the process of acting, you will learn.

Things that you would not have learned otherwise. So a.

So we decided let's do the fiscal adjustment with the IMF.

Let's ask the world Bank to deal with the electricity crisis. A year down the road.

The electricity crisis was only getting worse,

and the IMF was asking the government to increase Amr electricity prices because the deficit of the electricity company was just huge.

Okay. So that actually.

Happened in a meeting that I attended in Washington, D.C., during the annual meetings of of of 2014.

And after the annual meetings, I came back to the Kennedy School, and the Prime Minister was visiting the Kennedy School, and he spoke at the forum.

So we had a meeting here where I told him, look, the IMF wants you to raise electricity prices.

And that's a condition for them to continue.

And I disagree. So.

You are in that situation. The IMF wants you to increase electricity prices.

They argue that the fiscal deficit is huge. It's not.

We are not on track. And it's because of the of the losses of the electricity company.

So you need to raise electricity prices. What would you have said to that recommendation?

Again, increase the NPAs in the banks and that will increase the problem in the industry.

So. Right. So you say if I increase electricity prices, people are not going to pay or people are not going to companies are not going to pay.

So going to create multiple problems. Ultimately banks will also suffer.

Well, I mean, banks are not going to suffer in that logic. The company might not collect everything, but they might collect some more.

Well, my argument was a little bit more political. There are two types of Albanians.

There are good Albanians and bad Albanians. Good Albanians pay their electricity bill.

Bad Albanians don't pay their electricity bill. So the solution the IMF is imposing is to make the good Albanians pay for the bad on Damien's right.

So because you're only going to raise prices of electricity to those that are paying their electricity bill,

not to those that are stealing their electricity bill. Right.

So you are kind of hurting the people that that you wish to stimulate and not punish the people who who are causing the problem.

So I said, the only way we can solve this electricity problem is if we in some sense politicize the electricity problem.

We need to make it socially unacceptable for people not to pay the bill unless we change that behavior.

We're going to be back to square one. We have to make it socially unacceptable for people not to pay their electricity bills.

We have to, in some sense, criminalize not paying your electricity bills.

You have to make it socially unacceptable. Not to pay your rent recently, bill.

And so a this meeting happened in October.

So we start asking, you know, how can you do that. And so.

It was a lot of creativity in the process. They said, well, you cannot be working for the public sector and not pay your electricity bill.

That would be unacceptable for people who work for the public sector have to pay their electricity bills.

There has to be some some social sanction for you not paying your electricity bill.

So it went into a public relations campaign where the Prime Minister was explaining why people don't pay the electricity bill,

are stealing your Schoolrooms are stealing, your hospitals are stealing, you know, your infrastructure, etc.

And he said, okay, you haven't paid tricity bills until now.

You have to go to the electricity company and negotiate a payment payment program.

Right. Suddenly there were massive queues in the electricity company for people trying to get to pay.

And by the month of February, the swing in the cash flow of the electricity company was two percentage points of GDP.

That's more than any IMF program or just.

And the electricity company suddenly became profitable or more credible in terms.

And then that triggered a lot of foreign direct investment into electricity generation.

And electricity stopped being kind of like a drag to become a source of growth.

Okay. So. So how you act on the problem depends a lot on on it.

And by the way, if there is a cameo on Thursday,

remind me to talk to you about in the sense of us here because this is the first time we've kind of like, explored this idea of a sense of us.

Well, I'll tell you. So we did a survey asking in Albanians, what are the characteristics?

What makes us Albanian? What makes us Albanian?

But in a definition that if it is not completely true, it's at least aspirationally true.

If this is not who we are, this is at least who we wish we were or who we aspire to become.

Okay. Now guess what though?

And this was done with focus groups and so on. Tell me what what concept do you think came out of that?

We Albanians are. If no clue.

Well, they came up with we Albanians are European.

Now we are Albanians are Europeans.

The word European has all the positive connotations you can imagine in in Albania.

So objectively speaking, Albania is in the center of Europe, right?

It has on the other side of the Trento Straights, there's Italy, there's Greece up to the south, there in the center of Europe.

But they were North Korea, of Europe, so they were completely disconnected in their minds.

Europeans are modern, they're rich, they're developed.

They are they are secure.

They're democratic. They have all the positive connotations.

There is not a single Euro phobic political party in Albania.

So all the positive connotations. So the slogan was We Albanians are Europeans and Europeans pay their bills.

So. Anyway, so.

So in the case of garments we found, you know,

we did things extremely quickly and the garment sector started to grow by 28% a year in no time with relatively simple reforms.

In the case of agriculture is the story I told you.

And now it's operating super well, and it's agricultural exports made in greenhouses and are booming.

And we we decided to take the money out of production subsidies to infrastructure investments,

especially in aggregation and collection centers that could offer marketing services and could connect farmers with markets.

And that these investments ended up. Paying super well.

In the case of tourism, Albania has had a boom in tourism.

It's a it's the number one country in the rate of growth of tourism.

And the and then because we needed pioneers, we thought, okay, so migrants are not there.

FDI is problematic. What about the diaspora?

So we did an analysis of all the monkeys that had jumped all the known investments to see

which ones had been somehow connected with either the diaspora or returning diaspora.

So where did the business idea come from? That was the question. We interviewed 30 companies and all 30 companies were started by returnees.

100% of them. So it was not a so 100% of companies.

People who had gone abroad, had gone into business, worked abroad, learn the business abroad, came back and did it in Albania.

So we decided that this is something that if it's happening naturally, we can always stimulated for it to happen more.

We created our Minister of State for the diaspora and to engage more with the diaspora, to enhance those those activities.

So. In that sense, you see that a deep understanding of the context allows you to know what areas you think might be strategic to work on,

but exactly how you are going to work on is going to require much, much more detailed information than you have at the time of acting.

But you can generate processes. That can generate action strategies and in the process of engaging with actors.

Information will be revealed that is going to to to make those policy initiatives more precise.

So that's why I don't believe in delegating to some experts to policy design.

I like to say that there's no such thing as a perfect suit. There's only a perfectly tailored suit.

That is, every suit has to fit the body, and every body is different.

So you need to design things so that be fit, right.

And so what fits in one context doesn't fit in another context.

And the process of designing to context has to involve a lot of interaction with, uh, with local actors.

So let me let me stop there. Um, and on Thursday we discussed, uh, the sense of us.

Thank you.

