[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Which was during the times.

Right. I thought I would.

Huh? So we have. And I'll tell you that I did in London.

I don't know if you're young, but. Everything from.

So I don't. Remember.

So this is an channel.

Stock. Yeah. That's what I was just devastated.

That's definitely not true. So I had to report to myself.

I mean, you're definitely in some of those. I work in. Isolation.

So I got to make sure I completed my landlord, like, five times.

They never did it this year. I lied about what looked like they were planning to power.

And then I guess we could go over there and ask.

I. Mean, I that's awesome.

All right. All right.

So. This this lecture is on.

On the sense of us. And, um, let me motivate this lecture by the following.

Super, super important, uh, scientific observation.

And that is that the in 2016, uh, England did not qualify to the knock out knock off period in the Euro Cup.

Because it lost to Iceland 2 to 1. So I don't know how important you find that observation to be,

but and the interesting thing about it is that these were the 24 teams that qualify to the,

um, uh, to the Euro Cup, of which you have to choose only 16.

So only eight would be disqualified after this round. Okay.

And um, of the 24, eh, there are some, some countries that you would recognize.

For example, there's a country called Germany. There's a country called France, Spain.

Italy. Right. Sounds like obvious.

Right. Um, but then and there are these, uh, three countries, one called England, one called Wales, and one called Northern Ireland.

So why is it that the United Kingdom.

Had three things. One answer is that, well, because Gibraltar and Scotland didn't make it.

Otherwise they would have had five teams, right?

Now it's a little bit odd because if I told you, tell me in this map of 1300, where do you see a country called Germany?

Where do you see a country called Italy?

But you didn't have a united them and, you know, England and Wales united in in 1200 something and they united with Scotland in 1700 and something.

So they've been a united state for a very long time while, you know, Italy and Germany and so on are much younger states.

So why is it that the, you know, England had three teams?

I mean, the UK had three teams and France and Germany could figure out to send only one team.

You could have imagined that if England had sent, if the UK had sent only one team, maybe they would have won or right.

But they have to field five different teams, you know.

So. So the fact that England, the UK was.

Why would England want to send five teams over there.

Why would the UK one, two seven, five teams.

You would have said, well because you know we couldn't send one team instead of five, but it would not be our team.

It would be, you know, you know, if you are in Scotland it would be, you know,

some of these foreigners, the English, the Welsh or whatever, the Irish.

But it wouldn't be us. So what I would put to you is that this is kind of like, uh, um,

revelation that sending one team implies developing some kind of a broader sense of us that for them is a little bit counterintuitive.

Um, so no wonder if you ask them to, say, join like a bigger team like the EU.

They would have said, no, we don't belong there.

This is if they can't agree on sending one team, why would they agree on the EU.

Right. So so this is this is an illustration of some subtle thing about, you know, I'd rather lose and be us than join with a bunch of others and win.

But it wouldn't be us anymore. Right. So good.

So, uh, you know, there was, uh, there's this idea of, you know, um, uh, you know, build the wall, uh, in the US and, and in the US.

This idea of us and the foreigners is, is an important one in the in the first Trump presidency.

There was this whole issue about how, you know, you're of, you know, imposing some kind of Muslim ban.

But it was a big debate within the US whether this is something that reveals U.S. values or it doesn't reveal U.S. values.

But it's a bit a little bit of a divide of, you know, what it means to be us, what it means to be them who belongs here, who doesn't belong here.

What do we do about that now? And now that interestingly, that played out in Canada in, in a very, very different way.

So, so this is, uh, a picture that made it, uh, uh, across the world.

This is a little kid, a Syrian refugee in, in the coast of Turkey.

And the Syrian, the Syrian family wanted to get to Greece and the boat capsized.

And the the beautiful kid died, and it would have stayed there had it not been because this kid had an aunt,

aunt in Vancouver, and this aunt had been trying to get the kid to Canada with his mom.

The mom also died in this, in this accident.

And it turned out that she couldn't get her family into Canada because this guy Harper, prime minister at the time,

had taken up Trump's policies and had them a frozen the refugee processing stuff in February of that year.

When this made it into the news that Harper was leading the polls to win in an election that was happening in the month.

But this became like, uh, you know, this is not what Canada is about.

These are not Canadian values. And as a consequence, this guy ended up winning the election.

Okay. So here is you know, this is not us.

This is not what we do. This is not does not represent our values, does not represent who we are as a nation.

You're out. This other guy saying so this suggests that there's something about what what we interpret to be us, what it means to be us, and so on.

That determines many decisions as simple as these and more complicated decisions as we will, as we will see.

So the question is, can we make any sense of this?

Can what would be a conceptual framework where all of these little snippets of observation make some sense?

Okay. And I would put it to you that at the core of this thing is that aim.

Is a specifically, uniquely human aspect in.

That economics kind of like shoves under the ground.

It is clear that we are I mean, objectively,

we are the most successful species on Earth because we are the only species that can pretty much live anywhere.

We even have stations in Antarctica, right?

So we can leave and live anywhere. Uh, cold weather and hot weather and high mountains near the sea.

We can live pretty much everywhere. And that's because we are we are super cooperators.

We are an incredibly cooperative species. So humans are incredibly cooperative.

And I strongly recommend that you you read this book.

And the basis of this book is that we we are super successful because we are cooperative and because we are cooperative,

we can leverage the knowledge that exists in the network and not the knowledge that exists individually.

Right? So in his view, humans live on a social brain.

We access the social brain. And that knowledge that is somewhere in that social brain makes us be able to do incredible things.

Okay. And we evolved to be cooperative.

And we have a bunch of features that make us cooperative. And so but the basic problem, the basic theoretical problem of cooperation.

Is the free rider problem, right?

What's a free rider problem? I'm supposed to cooperate with who you are.

Supposed to cooperate with me? If you cooperate with me, I'm better off.

But if I can get away without cooperating with you, I'm better, right?

I gain from your cooperation. But I even better than not having the burden of cooperating with you.

So that's a free rider problem. It's kind of like a prisoner's dilemma problem.

We end up in a in a bad equilibrium because we are.

Each one understands that our incentives deviate from cooperation.

So evolution had to make us cooperative. And evolution invented a trick to make us cooperative.

Anybody want to guess what that trick is? Yes.

We feel empathy for the other person. If somebody has empathy.

Okay, so empathy is one interesting idea that actually we have a, um,

a part of our brain which has something called mirror neurons that when you see somebody hurting you,

you kind of like feel the same thing in your brain. You can imagine what the other person is, right?

So empathy is one, but empathy is just one class of, um, a broader class of things.

So what could that broader class of things?

Survival. Uh, survival. It's not uniquely human.

Everybody, all, all species want to survive. Oh, um, so we invented moral sentiments.

Okay, so we developed a whole species, a whole set of moral sentiments of which empathy is one.

Okay. But we have a collection of others.

For example. If I was suppose to cooperate with you, and I didn't, knowing that I should have cooperated with you, I feel guilt.

Now, what triggers guilt might be very cultural, but the capacity to feel guilt is being coded for in our genes.

So it's a protein. It's coded in our genes. And, you know, we feel guilt.

Um, something triggers us feeling guilt. Right? But it feels guilt when you were supposed to cooperate and you didn't.

Okay. Now, when you were supposed to cooperate and you didn't, and other people find out.

You feel shame. Okay.

Now, when the other person was supposed to cooperate with you and they didn't.

You feel outrage, right?

No. So. So we have this cocktail of neurotransmitters that are making us feel things about.

So that's why there's this nice book on on evolutionary psychology.

Human evolutionary psychology by. By this guy called Robert Wright with a W.

It's called the moral animal. So we are these moral animals and.

Um, there are some theorist here at Harvard. Um, professor called.

I'll tell you in a second.

Um, he has a theory that says what supports cooperation is some kind of punishment, but he has to work out what is, uh, efficient way of punishing.

Because if you were supposed to cooperate with me and you didn't,

and I go out and try to punish you, maybe you beat me up so I'm not going to punish you.

And so if you are the alpha male here and you are the powerful guy, you can not cooperate with me.

And I cannot do anything with you. Because if I try to hit you, you'll hit me back, and it will be worse.

Right. Game. If you want third party enforcement, you have to ask yourself the question.

What would be? Who would be a third party enforcer of punishment.

Well, you know, if somebody did not cooperate with somebody else, why should I get involved?

You have to make it super cheap for me to punish. So he derived the theory of why it is that we gossip.

So we gossip about other people's behavior as a way of punishing.

So. And so gossip is, is a pleasurable punishment.

People love to gossip. So it's not a very expensive punishment for you.

So you love to gossip. But the butt of the gossip a is the person on whom are gossiping feels social pain.

And you know, when things are done with, you know, visualizing activity in the brain.

When people feel social pain, the parts of the brain that that light up when they feel physical pain also light up when you feel social pain.

So our moral sentiments have know hijacked our, our our feelings to, to make them play a role in social interaction.

So we are cooperators genetically cooperators.

So it's it's part of our human universal and.

The name of the author will come to him anyway.

So. So in some we feel that we belong to a certain us.

And I love the term us because it's super imprecise, right?

You don't know who you're talking about, right? It's sort of like super implicit.

I never define us. Right. And we feel guilty when we fail to cooperate with us.

We feel ashamed when others find out.

We feel outraged when we learn that others have failed to cooperate with us, and we punish transgressors who did not cooperate.

And we derive satisfaction from feeling that we behave properly.

So, you know, I might have a sense of identity as either a son or husband, a father or grandfather or neighbor.

Um, uh, a colleague, uh, professor and associated with each one of these identities.

There's a certain sense of obligations, what constitutes a good neighbor, what constitutes a good father,

etc., and you feel a certain satisfaction from behaving according to the norms associated with that identity.

You feel a certain tension when you when you violate your sense of what is a proper X, a proper father, a proper colleague, a proper teacher, etc.

Okay, so we have very different senses of us that are coexisting, right?

Um, so, you know, you might have a sense of us as, uh, Bostonian,

as a person from Massachusetts, as an American, as, uh, citizen of the world, as a Red Sox fan.

Right. So there are many different senses in which you have a sense of belonging, a certain responsibility to us.

Yeah. So cooperation is not grounded exclusively on self-interest, but it's grounded on moral sentiments.

You know, it's very interesting that a when when economists start to think about the principal agent problem,

right, that the principle delegates on an agent, a certain set of actions or choices, but then the agent,

instead of doing things for the benefit of the principle, start to do things for the benefit of themselves.

So when economists started to think about that, they came up with a solution.

And the solution is to align the incentives of the principal and the agent.

So if you have a manager or CEO of a company, the shareholders want the CEO to maximize the value of the company to the share value of the company.

But they pay a salary or they pay something. Right? So, uh, the salary is unconnected to to the performance.

So they invented stock options like they said.

No, we should pay the CEO with stock options.

That way it will be in his self-interest or her self-interest to to maximize the value of the company, because the more so you align incentives.

Well, stock options might have been invented by economists, but evolution invented moral sentiments.

The guy tries to maximize the value of the company because that's what a CEO is supposed to do.

That's what you know you would. His reputation is based on.

That's what you know. There's a set of other things.

So, for example, there's this guy George Akerlof, and him and Rachel Cramton have this book called, uh, what's a book called?

Akerlof and Crampton and experience, uh, and you might experience knock, knock.

Um, they'll tell me, um, I also recommend Berger, but.

So a homo economicus is based on the idea that you do whatever is best for you, given your options.

Right? A home on morals would do what he feels he ought to do, given who he or she is, and given what he or she tries to become.

Maybe you're the CEO of this medium sized company.

You want to be the CEO of a much more important company, and you feel that your reputation is at stake in how you manage a company.

You want to have prestige vis a vis others. So you run the company because you have this sense of moral obligation to it.

By the way, these guys say Akerlof and Crampton, have you found the name in economics, identity, economics.

So. He would have said. They would have said,

if you derive utility from feeling that you're behaving according to this idea of who you should be or who do you want to become?

So there's this base of moral sentiments that I want you to bring you to,

that that are an important dimension of human interaction, of human cooperation, of human many things.

Okay. So now human cooperation has been under pressure because back when we were living in very small bands,

this is a pretty advanced human settlement already because they may be somewhat mobile,

but, you know, it's already a village and more or less this a group of, I don't know, maybe a couple of hundred people.

Right. And so obviously they all know each other.

They all speak the same language. They probably all kind of look like each other.

Uh, if you if you look at their genetic lineage, they're all deeply interrelated, right?

They're not interacting with too many people. Right.

So a a if you live near people who look like you, you spoke a, you know, the same language that they would speak, actually,

because people tend to look so much like you, the brain, um, didn't develop too much, the ability to distinguish.

So we have an incredible ability to distinguish faces.

So and by the way, there's, um, there's, um, mental illness in inability to identify faces that they're.

A that is a you know, so we need we need to identify faces.

But the brain developed an incredible ability to identify accents.

So because the accent tells you is this person us or not us.

Right. I pride myself that I can recognize a Latin American by the accent they have when they speak English.

Trying test it. So, for example. Well, for example, do you know what's the meaning of June?

June? June is the months that comes before July.

That's an Argentinian. Okay, so, um, even the Bible has, um, uh, a story where.

And they're supposed to sign, I don't know, probably God gave the order of killing everybody, and they didn't know who was who.

So they would, uh, have them run this test.

They would have to say shibboleth. And, uh, and this tribe would not know how to say shibboleth.

They would say severely. So if you said Sybil less. Okay.

You're dead. All right. So. So.

Now, we also live with people who kind of shared our values because, you know, we had probably the same kind of festivities and so on.

So a remnant of a history of very little interaction is anybody.

Guess what. What that picture is probably not right.

But yeah, the Tower of Babel that that because we interacted with very few people, we you know language tends to diverge.

Language tends to evolve and it evolves in a way that is comprehensible to the people you talk with.

So, for example, I have now been 30 years in the US.

So but I speak Spanish with my Venezuelan accent.

But people think that I speak Spanish with a Venezuelan accent of 40 years ago, and I use expressions that people say, oh, what a quaint expression.

I had not heard it. And so, so because in these 30 years the language has evolved and, you know,

etc. so if you don't believe that language evolves, try reading Shakespeare, right?

I mean, I find it much easier to read Shakespeare in Spanish than in English, because I don't know what the [INAUDIBLE] they're saying anyway.

So that's 500 years. So with enough time happens, languages diverge and we know that, you know, Spanish,

French, Italian, Portuguese, Romanian all came from Latin am, but actually German.

And all the Latin romance languages came from Indo-European language.

And it's impossible to see how that could have happened. Right.

So, um, but because of, of language evolving and, you know, talking to other people, then languages tend to speak than separate.

So in Alaska, there were 19 languages. In Mexico there's over 130 languages.

In Cameroon, there's over 230 languages.

Cameroon is, uh, is a relatively small country, more or less the size of Spain.

Spain is a highly yeah, it's there like seven languages in Spain, but there are 203 languages in Cameroon.

There's over 700 languages. In Indonesia, there's over 1600 languages performed.

In India, there's over 2500 languages in Africa.

That's the remnants of a history of many people not interacting with each other.

Right. So our radius of cooperation was very small.

Our political organization was very fragmented.

Right. It was very fragmented because.

Im at a certain point in time, a military techno military defense technology became much more powerful than military offensive technologies.

So whoever had enough power to build a castle.

He was home free. Right. So it would be extremely expensive to dislodge them.

And that led to this fragmentation, political fragmentation.

And that happened until. They invented things like this.

And this was sort of like the atom bomb of the time.

It was incredibly expensive. You have to mine iron, and you had to shape the iron into a cannon and you have to produce explosives.

Actually, what triggered this was the discovery of a corn gunpowder.

So gunpowder had been known for. You know, Marco Polo brought it in from China.

But gunpowder is a mix of three substances, uh, that have different weights.

So they tend to separate, but they only explode well, when they are in, in the right combination.

So what I believe were must have been French cooks who figured out that if you take this, this mix and you make it into little pellets like couscous.

Then they get stabilized. They don't. They don't mix anymore, and they don't separate anymore.

And they explode in a very predictable way. And that's what gave rise to this innovation.

And once you have this, these walls become butter. So suddenly that leads to the possibility of political consolidation.

Okay. And then.

And then came the Industrial Revolution and the Industrial Revolution had the effect had two effects.

It it created economies of scale that wanted companies that wanted economic activity to have access to larger markets.

Okay. So larger political entities.

So there's a, uh, an incentive power for political unification so you can access a larger market, but it also required a larger set of public goods.

So in our language, more vowels, a big increase in the number of vowels, and the number of vowels that you have to agree on.

Right. So, uh, you know, if you're going to have, uh, a, an economy that is based on,

on knowledge and human capital, somebody has to decide, you know, what's the school system like?

What's the language that gets taught in that school, and what's the history that gets taught in that school?

Uh, you know, etc., etc., or the values that get transmitted by that school.

Uh, you have to agree on, you know, uh, what happens when, uh, worker gets sick, what happens when a worker gets old,

uh, etc. also, so suddenly you have to have a much broader sense of agreement on more things.

So economies of scale requires a broader sense of us.

You have to think of yourself not as a Bavarian, but as a German.

Oh, um, or you have to think of yourself not as a as a Swede, but as a European.

Right? That's a broader sense of us. But it also requires to develop a deeper sense of us that is capable of agreeing on more public goods.

Oh, no, there are more things in which you have to sign off on.

So. The unification of Germany ended up happening in 1871.

It started. The process started in 1815.

Or if you wanted, even before 1815. Because, uh, the big shock to Europe was the Napoleonic Wars.

And Napoleon conquered everything around him and destroyed the political entity that was, quote unquote,

Germany, which was the Holy Roman Empire, which, as the joke goes, was neither holy nor Roman or an empire.

But. Okay, so and then he started to creating these, these, uh,

different political entities that were sufficiently small so that they would be weak Vis-a-vis France.

So that created a political movement in, in the Germanic lands, if you want, which was called nationalism.

And the first thing that this movement of nationalism decided to create was a customs union, dissolve the Rhine.

So it was, uh, a customs union where you could trade within that territory without having to pay taxes every time you crossed a political border.

I was. But in eventually that became 60 years later, Germany.

And by the way, it almost became Germany in 1848 with the revolutions of 1848.

And these revolutions failed over the issue of whether Germany included Austria or didn't include Austria.

They called it the small Germany or the big Germany. And so and anyway, so ended up in 1871.

So you see. But once you, you decide to create Germany, you have to decide what the [INAUDIBLE] is German?

What does it mean? What is German? Because everybody spoke a different.

Language, but they would call it a different dialect.

And as you know, the difference between a dialect and language is that a language has an army and a navy.

The writing that is a language implies some political power that is able to standardize language,

to decide what is the grammar of that language, that is able to say, that's what gets taught in school.

That's how official texts are written. That's how, you know, that's the common language of everybody.

So so they decided to create a language in Germany.

They decided to create the language in Italy. And, you know, they made they made the language spoken in Florence.

They made that Italian, and everybody else spoke a dialect. Okay.

And actually, if you talk to an Italian, my generation, it's easier because for my generation.

My, my, my Italian friends of my generation only speak Italian.

Their parents spoke Italian and the dialect and their grandparents spoke the dialect and very lousy Italian.

So I have um, my son in law is from Cali, Colombia.

His father is from Calabria, Italy, and he is.

His father is like my age. His parents spoke Calabrian and then never spoke Italian.

So. And his. His father speaks Calabrian and horrible Italian.

And so this is not something that happened. You know, and centuries ago.

This is something that is happening as we speak. Okay.

So, um, but for some reason, uh, this unification didn't stop there.

After the Second World War, it expanded, and there's still a lot of energy in terms of expanding it.

Um, all of these countries are trying to accede, and and Ukraine is now in accession discussions.

So is Moldova. I think Turkey's never going to happen.

Georgia. I wish they were. So. Um, you have to ask yourself, what is the force behind that?

Because when. This is so the country to which I belong.

Venezuela. And once upon a time used to include Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador and Panama.

And now these are four states. You have to ask yourself a question.

Why were there forces to create four different states?

And now there are forces to unify a bunch of states in Europe.

And and we've been trying to unify states and create some association of Latin America and something or it's never happened.

There's an attempt to organize something like medical school. It's going nowhere.

Right. So or something about, um, the and the impact.

It's going nowhere. So. So ask yourself the question. What?

Why would by the way. Let me ask you a question. What would be your guess of?

Why is there such pressures for unification in Europe that we don't observe in Latin America?

Yes. Um, I think Calderon, um, lack self-confidence in the European Union.

And they want to show that they can enlarge youth as a vision of a more unified, uh, Europe.

But what would be what why would, uh, countries agree to it?

What would be in it for them? So accession started with very rich countries, but some just um, so that it gets started with richer countries.

Lots of new countries are coming in, for example, Bosnia and Herzegovina, if I'm not mistaken, our GDP per capita of $6,000 or something.

Um, uh, similar even even maybe 4000.

But then Montenegro is about 6 or 7, if I'm not mistaken. Uh, and they see Germany with the 55,000, I guess, with some flavor.

And they can help them with utilities and things like that. So it's a great incentive.

And why would why would Germany, what's in it for Germany.

They want more impact on the global scale.

We've seen Russia and China and the US. They had a very, um, important role in the past.

And nowadays they feel like that. But but they they don't have an army.

The European Union doesn't have an army or that to protect them, you know, so far, if you ask me only one time.

Yeah. Mhm. Yes. I would say that the combination of countries started uh, in terms of making peace, um, uh, start avoiding wars between each others.

And then it was like within the past year it was just like, uh, political, eh, admiration that like, grow itself.

Um, and they, I mean, if they split right now, they're going to lose so much political problems.

Yes, I agree about that. Uh, I think that those have to do with the trauma of the Second World War.

They say, well, we're war. And then there's also the division of and this time with Europe.

Yes.

I think it has to do with the sense of the development that we've seen in Europe has led to an ability to have confidence and trust in each other,

because I think that in order to go into an EU type situation, you you are giving up some level of legislation to a higher body.

So it involves kind of like, I mean, I don't know, we don't like to use the institutions word in this class, but like it could be this part.

I mean, I'm curious to get your take on it like, like that idea of like building that institution,

um, and the trust that it can I can work effectively.

Um, and it works somewhat effectively in each of those countries. And then we believe that this process could be effective at the regional scale.

And then from an incentive perspective, we can see that, you know, it just improves trade, improves kind of ability from, uh, theory of complexity.

It's quite clear that there's economic benefits to having the creation of the EU.

So yeah, I mean, whenever you ask yourself that question and I want you to have a,

an explanation that would simultaneously explain Europe and say, the political fragmentation of Latin America or a the stability of India.

So so I'm going to go there. So, so ehm, but I my short answer to the European Union is that you have these two forces you need, uh,

you want the next, uh, access to a larger market because there are economies of scale of some kind.

And you want. More public goods, for which you need a deeper sense of us.

But a deeper sense of us is easier to achieve if you're more homogeneous.

So if it was just for a deeper sense of us, there should be a country called Bavaria.

There shouldn't be a country called Germany because the Bavarians have nothing to do with, with, uh, people from Hamburg or from Saxony or whatever.

They are Bavarians, right? But if you want to tone down the Bavarian identity and tone up the German identity or the European identity,

then suddenly you have access to a bigger market.

But you have to agree on more things. So if you want access to a bigger market, it's like a centripetal force.

It unifies people. But having to agree on more public goods is a centrifugal force and it pushes people apart.

So my short answer is that Latin America doesn't unify because we don't trade with each other.

So if you look at the structure of our exports, we are outward looking.

We you know, Chile sends its copper to, to China.

And, uh, you know, um, Brazil sends its soybeans and its, uh, iron ore to China.

And so there's and Mexico sells all its stuff to the US.

So there's very little inter-regional trade. So there's very little of, of trying to have a broader sense of us.

There's not that much payoff for the broader sense of us.

So in that case, I might as well then have a smaller unit that in which I have more control over the nature of the public works.

So so that's it. That's my my story there.

Now, interestingly enough, the sense of us is actually held together by typically stories.

You know, something you might want to call foundational myths or founding myths okay.

And there are several founding myths, for example.

There are some biblical scholars that say that the oldest part of the Bible is the Book of Judges and the Book of Samuel, and in the Book of Samuel.

So the book of judges and stuff is the 12 tribes living in this, in this region.

And then in Samuel they are undergoing some political threats from the Philistines and so on.

So they decide that they want to unify under a single king for very clear defensive reasons.

Okay. So these biblical scholars say, okay, so now they need kind of like a founding myth of why they are unifying.

And the myth developed was that these 12 tribes are actually the children of Jacob, who's the son of Isaac, who was the son of Abraham, and so on.

So they're actually brothers, so they should belong in the same kingdom, because ultimately they are brothers.

So that's the foundational myth. Okay. So, so now we all belong together because we belong.

There's a there's a story that makes us want to.

Yeah, naturally belong together. So a second foundational myth.

Let's talk about the US. The founding myth of the US is that it's a country that was founded by the founding fathers, no mothers, founding fathers,

and they bequeathed the Declaration of Independence, a constitution and a Bill of rights that gave them freedom.

And because of that freedom, it created this incredible country.

Thanks to these this Constitution, this Bill of rights, this Declaration of Independence and so on.

And were it not for these founding fathers. The US today would be like Canada.

Right. Because Canada is precisely the English provinces in America that did not become independent, right?

That it remained loyal to the Crown and so on. So now I don't know what differences you want to establish between Canada and the US.

Right. And, you know, their health care system seems to run a little bit better.

And and, you know, whatever. But but it doesn't matter.

The founding myth doesn't have to be true. It has to place plays a function that is not its historical accuracy.

It plays a function in terms of, of highlighting, of giving salience to a set of things that brings you together.

Okay. And now in Europe, the situation was a little bit more complicated because at the end of the First World War,

you had the collapse of two multi-ethnic states, had the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and you have the Ottoman Empire.

And these two empires collapse. So what kind of political organization do you build on top of that?

And what they came up with is this idea that.

Every. In those days, it was very clear every nation should have a state and the nation.

It's a very today. You know, what's the difference between a nation and a state?

Now, today, somewhat not very intuitive, but in those days it was super intuitive.

A nation is an identity, typically of a group of people that have a common history.

And because they have a common history,

they have a common history because they used to talk to each other and they used to talk to each other because they share a language.

So a nation is very much related to language.

It's not, uh, and, you know, there were more languages.

You know, historically the number of languages is collapsing as we speak.

So they decided to create, uh, an ethnic boundary of the state, except that the,

the states there have been, you know, it's very hard to unscramble the eggs, right?

There have been a lot of mixing during these multi-ethnic empires.

So, for example, they decided to create Poland in 1922.

Poland had disappeared as a state for 150 years or so.

And they said, okay, this is Poland. And actually Poland in 1922 was designed to be what is today Poland then, and half of Ukraine.

Um, but they said, okay, we will recognize you as a state, you'll be Poland, but you have to give citizenship rights to every ethnicity in Poland.

So in that.

So for example, what they called in those days were Fenians,

which today you call Ukrainians or the German speakers or the Jews became citizens of Poland for the first time thanks to this,

because before the event they were not given citizenship rights.

So that's how they created the the state.

Now, a many other states were created and it's very I strongly recommend that you read this book called Imagined Communities.

It was first written in the 1970s. Did you read it?

Oh, it's a lot of books to read. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.

So, yeah. So in this book was written in the 1970s.

It has the second edition from the 2000, and I think Benedict Ben Anderson passed away like five or so years ago.

But it's a brilliant book on how a, how these identities get formed through history and through political strife and so on and so on.

So their identities are obviously every identity wants to say that it has.

It's a real history, but it's really a it's a community of the mind.

It's an imagined community. Yes.

It was, um, was the language of southeast France and, um, northwest Italy more similar before they become countries started to separate.

Or if you would, you would say so. Right. That that there are some.

For example, if you look through Spain, Galician is close to Portuguese.

A Catalonian was speaking spoken on both sides of the border.

Basque was spoken on both sides of the war between Spain um and France.

And um. Yeah. Savoy young uh, was uh, spoken on both the Swiss side and um, and uh, the, um, the French side.

And so, so there's, uh, gradients of, of similarity if you want.

Thanks. So the idea here is that, um, what you have is you have the creation of an idea of, of an entity to which you belong.

Okay. And, um. Um, yeah.

So, so that it's very interesting to ask yourself a question.

What is the story behind the community said?

What makes Colombians, Colombians? What makes Venezuelans, Venezuelans?

What makes Venezuelans not Colombians, okay?

What makes us and us versus them? And that has to do with some explanation.

That's in some kind of a narrative that belongs to some imagined community.

Okay. So. One thing that I think happened in the world is that the Industrial Revolution

led to the possibility of deploying a bunch of new goods and technologies,

but that required some public goods. And these public goods have to be provided by a state.

But much of the world didn't have states that could provide these functions.

So technology could not diffuse there unless somebody provided these functions.

Somebody provided the vowels. So, you know, the process started with Britain trying to make business with India,

by the way, just imitating what the Dutch were doing, trying to do business with India.

And then suddenly they are in India and they put the, uh, warehouse there and the warehouse is attacked.

So they defend the warehouse and they put some kind of defensive force, and then they start playing for stability and they end up conquering India.

By the way, it was conquered by a private company.

And when the private company got into trouble managing India, a the British crown took away the power of the company to manage India.

And then it made it into a state thing. But that happened in 1857, when the company had already been in India for 250 years.

So it was not like, uh, a state enterprise.

So the kind of that's why there's this expression that Britain stumbled into Empire did not plan for empire,

but this was very different from what happened in the 1890s.

The 1890s is this period called the scramble for Africa, where suddenly a,

you know, the world invents, uh, quinine, which appears to be good for malaria.

And, um, they develop ships that can run up, uh, rivers in, in Africa.

And so there's this scramble for Africa, where the European powers try to carve themselves a piece of Africa.

That happened in the 1890s. That's a very, very different colonization from what happened in the 1500s in Latin America,

or the role that the Brits made or the Dutch played in 1600s, 1700s, 1800s in in India, in Indonesia and Sri Lanka, etc.

So we tend to now, these days, mix all of these things under what we call colonialism and the colonial enterprise.

But these things were radically different phenomena occurring at radically different times.

A you know, Sri Lanka was controlled for 150 years by the Portuguese, then 150 years by the Dutch, and 150 years by the Brits.

Okay. Nobody there speaks Portuguese.

Nobody speaks Dutch. Right. Uh, people speak somewhat English, but for the most part, they speak Sinhalese.

And you ask yourself a question. Why is it that they, we don't speak catch?

Why in Latin America we all speak Spanish. And that didn't happen in in Sri Lanka, if it's the same colonizer.

Or, you know, or a similar call. It's because the nature of the process was very, very different.

So, um, I want to I'm going to push you to think about these things.

But there are many challenges to the sense of us in, in, in the world.

So the idea is you need to create a state. The state acts on behalf of us.

Who the [INAUDIBLE] is us and what are the how do you create this imagined community for which the state is supposed to be acting on?

So on. So here's a map of Afghanistan.

This is an ethnic map of Afghanistan. You see that there are a Baluch is coming, you know.

You have Pashtuns. So all these guys, you have a Tajiks and you have.

A Turkmens, you have a, you know, all sorts of of of different people, different languages, different ethnic groups within what we call Afghanistan.

Right. So that's why, you know, Afghanistan has had trouble not being in some kind of a war, right?

A similar story you can say about Ethiopia. Um, Ethiopia has about 80 languages.

You have at least six large groups, and it's very rural, very agricultural.

And the tribes allocate the land. So with a fixed amount of land, if your tribe controls more land, you have access to more land.

Your tribe determines your access to land. So people have a very strong tribal identity, an overall Ethiopian identity, which is much weaker.

So in history, uh, there's there's a bunch of different states.

There are ancient states like China, Ethiopia or Thailand.

Latin America has 18 states. They all have one language and they all have one dominant religion.

Okay, so you might have asked yourself the question,

why the [INAUDIBLE] would there be 18 states if they all speak the same language and they all have the same dominant religion,

what are they splitting on? Right? Same thing you can say about the Arab world.

The Arab world has 22 states, actually, not 19, 22 states.

There's 22 states for which Arab is the official language, even though some people will tell you that.

So, for example, we were working on Morocco, and they say that the problem of education in Morocco is that education in school is in Arabic.

But no one in Morocco speaks Arabic because the distance between Standard Arabic and what they speak in Morocco is bigger than the distance between,

I don't know, Spanish and French, or so it's, uh, these things have spiked that a lot.

But in any case, there was one one language and one dominant religion.

You would have said, well, same language, same religion, same state.

Now you have 22 different states. And for a while, though, the states at the beginning of their creation, say,

after the Second World War, had nationalist identities, that is, pan-Arab identities.

And for a little while under Nasser, they created something called the United Arab Republic, which had.

Syria, Libya and Syria, Libya and Egypt.

It lasted for the better part of 15 minutes, but for its.

Once you think the core of our identity is is Arab.

Then you suddenly think you belong to a broader group of people who speak Arabic.

If you change that to say the core of my identity is Islam, then suddenly the Coptic don't belong in Egypt.

You no longer to go to us. And suddenly if you make Islam being salient, then the Sunni Shia divide becomes more salient.

So depending on what you define as the core of the US, it's going to have to change the nature of the of the problems.

Pakistan is a country that has a bunch of languages.

But the whole idea of the country is that it is held together because it has a single religion.

So they split from India because of religion. And so religion is supposed to be the source.

You could have imagined a different world, a different separation, where they would have said Bengalis are Bengalis, Punjabis are Punjabis.

And so there's been a country called Bengal, a country called Punjab.

That's not what happened. What happened is that they split Bengal.

They split Punjab on the basis of of religion.

And so in. If you take religion out of Pakistan, you destroy the glue that holds it together.

Okay. Now in India.

You could argue that India has been politically more stable than Pakistan.

Pakistan actually eventually split between what is now Bangladesh and Pakistan,

even though they were both Muslim and Bangladesh was Bengali and was different from the Punjabis that were controlling Pakistan, etc.

Right? But those things didn't happen in India.

And India is weird because India has all of these languages, has all of these religions, and it kind of holds together.

And to me, that's kind of like a puzzle.

The dominant theory is that a, a the Brits ruled India, and then the Indian elites wanted to essentially replace the Brits.

So since the structure of control of the nation was in bequeathed by the Brits, and so the Indian elite took the place of the Brits.

Yeah. And partially agree with that.

But I think the constitution that put in place had like representation and more like,

so you have different factions which are fighting for power, but they feel that they have a voice.

I think certainly that helps. And that structure that they got from British is essentially inherited in the Parliament system.

So that helps kind of keep their political divisions.

But it's a much better form of like expression at least.

Now the the interesting thing is that the British kind of like bequeathed the same thing for Britain,

for India and Pakistan, and in some sense in Pakistan had it easier.

You could argue that they had it easier because in India you have, you know, 13% Muslims, you have a gen,

you have Sikhs, you have, you know, Christians, you have other things now, but it somehow has stuck together.

Now there is this fight between India.

They aim the National Congress, the Congress Party and um,

and the BJP and the BJP is a little bit on raising the Hindu identity, the Hindu religious identity if you want.

Right. And so anyway. But that's those are the tensions there.

In Albania, it's interesting that you have three religions. You have one language.

So in Pakistan you cannot make the identity based on language because there's no unity on language.

In Albania, you cannot make the identity based on religion because there's no unity on religion, but there's a unity in language.

Everybody speaks Albanian, somewhat different accents, but it's all Albanian,

very different from from the Slavic languages or Greek that is spoken around them.

So they feel Albanian. So in. In sub-Saharan Africa, you have 54 states and over 20 languages.

So you can imagine that, uh, nation state is would kind of be impossible in, in Africa because you have 2500 states.

Uh, and, uh, so, so creating a sense of us is going to be more, more challenging.

Um, so there there are two different kinds of ways in which you can create a sense of us.

One is based on a descriptive characteristics, descriptive characteristics, things you are born with, okay.

And things are born with is your race. Maybe the language that your, you know, your your your first language, right.

Maybe, maybe the religion you inherited from your parents and so on.

So these things are relatively it's not a choice variable.

And an alternative source of national identity is some civic identity.

So ascribe to things are typically race ethnicity or religion.

And that's what holds you together. So if you ask yourself what what is your opinion about foreigners?

Well, they're not of our race. They're not of our language or not of our religion.

So they don't belong or where you would. Aim and civic values are more a like a what the US tries to to aspires to be.

Or some people in the US aspire to be a which is just you pledge allegiance to a flag into a republic, into a set of values.

And that because of that, if you pledge, that doesn't matter if you're Italian,

American, Greek, American, American, whatever, you know you belong, right?

So but that means that you tone down race, you tone down religion, you tone down, uh, national origin and so on.

So, for example, this is, uh, I got a definition of the civic identity this I took from John McCain.

It says fellow Americans. He says this association has meant more to me than any other.

I lived and died a proud American. We are citizens of the world's greatest republic.

Okay? A nation of ideals, not blood or soil. Okay, so we are blessed and our our blessing to humanity.

We uphold and advance the ideals at home and in the world. We have helped liberate more people from tyranny and poverty than ever before in history.

We have acquired great wealth and power. In the process, we weaken our greatness when we confuse our patriotism with tribal rivalries that

we have sown resentment and hatred and violence in all corners of the world.

So. So it's this idea that there's a spirit, the set of values.

That's what holds this stuff together. Okay, so that's kind of like a civic identity.

And so, uh, a.

So one question that you might ask yourself, given your self identity, how open can you be to foreigners?

So for example, I like this this movie called Eight Basque Last Names.

It's a romantic comedy of a Basque woman who falls in love with an Andalusian man.

And her father, you know, thinks it's inconceivable that she would marry anybody that does not have at least eight Basque class names.

One of the reasons why I asked you about your grandparents is because, see how much mixing is there in your lineage, right?

Because the history of mixing is in yourself, right?

So, um, so, um, you know, when you think about your countries,

you want to describe the political institutions of the country, how capable is the state, what limits state effectiveness?

Is the state balanced with a strong society and so on. What is the racial, ethno linguistic, religious, and migrant composition of your country?

Is it fragmented or polarized vis a vis other countries? Is it so what holds this country together?

So that's why I'm here. We have, uh, the survey that you completed and I'm since, uh, only one third of the class did not complete the survey.

We know who you are. So, um. Yeah, um, I mixed it with my other class, so I have 90 respondents, you know, 144 respondents.

So that makes it harder for you to know who answered. Um, so these are the countries of origin of, of the class.

So and so that's that's the composition I'm surprised with.

And a so that's the regional composition I'm going to aggregate things by region even though I'm making errors,

because not every country in the region is the same. But you know, just do for presentational purposes.

Um, and so a similar number of people from East Asia Pacific, from North America and from Latin America, 11% from South Asia and so on.

So a half of the class from comes from high income countries, and then the rest comes from lower income countries.

And it's more or less balanced by gender. A it's a little bit tilted to the left and 52% are moderate or far left and so on.

And then a A and the majority comes from upper middle class.

Some people accept that they come from upper class.

But my, my, my suspicion is that there's a bunch of people who classify themselves as upper middle income, which may not actually be.

So, um. How many of your grandparents share this with you?

Religion. So it's a little bit more than three.

So four is the maximum, you know, a country it's a little bit more than three region.

It's more more like half and socioeconomic status it's much lower.

So there's much more social mobility. No.

So you see that the in the data how much do differences across this creates challenges to your country's national cohesion.

What I like in the way we asked the question is we didn't ask about your opinion.

We asked about your opinion of people in your country. So in some sense, we are taking you as a knowledgeable expert about your countries.

Okay. So if necessity, um, is a is not important.

So one is more important. One is more important.

So zero is more important. Yeah.

So uh, ethnicity is very important in sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia, not so in Europe or in South Asia, because I guess in South Asia,

if necessity is very shared, I mean, there's some difference between Indian and between northern and southern and India.

But this is how important is aim for identity formation.

Is is what is ethnicity. So how much it creates time.

So and this is okay. So in Ethiopia ethnicity is very important for identity.

And it creates challenges. And not so in Ukraine or in Spain.

Well I'm not so sure about Spain and or in Colombia, Venezuela etc. that the ethnicity is not an unimportant determinant.

This one is language. So a language is not important in Latin Americans because we all speak Spanish.

Right? But language is very important in sub-Saharan Africa.

And in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and again in, uh,

the importance of language to social cohesion is is very high in Australia and it's a creates challenges to social cohesion.

That might be I don't know why you know someone that just a weird Australian.

But it's interesting in Thailand supposedly it's a problem.

It's not a problem in the Americas. That's not where the divisions are political beliefs.

It tends to be more important as a source of division in North America and in Latin America.

So here again, um, political beliefs you have that they're a big source of, of division in Colombia,

Chile, Bangladesh, Brazil, etc. and not so much in Ethiopia where the divisions are more on ethnic lines.

Right. A race, it's again, um, important in North America.

It's a big divide in a in, in East Asia, but not so much in, in Eastern Europe or Western Europe.

So. This again is the relationship between how important this race to the formation of identity and to and to the divisions between society.

So, uh, what I want to highlight with all of this, and I let you explore the, uh, the results is, is, um,

to for you to think about what holds the country together on which you're trying to develop a capable state.

Okay. So what is the glue?

So why has Latin America not unified if it, you know, if the things that split other countries apart, like language or religion are not important.

The same thing with the Arab world. What unifies what what what keeps these countries together?

What separates apart from the others? What holds them together? What holds India together?

You are starting these countries in each one of these countries, there are things to say in Saudi Arabia,

you know, 10 million people, which is a third of the population are foreigners.

They don't have citizenship rights. They are 80 plus percent of private employment.

So there's a big divide between us and not us in terms of, you know, who's the state for, etc.

Israel is a country cohesive, no problems, no problems of any kind in between,

between Jews of different persuasions, between Jews and Arabs, between citizens of Israel and the neighbors, etc.

So huge issue here in Ghana.

There are like 200 languages in Ghana and 200 languages in Ghana and in India.

We talked about Bangladesh is interesting. It's uh, it's the opposite of India.

It's all Bengalis and all Muslims. So a the Dominican Republic is is.

