[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
You know, you're saying that he, uh.

Yes. So. Uh huh.

Who are we talking about? So I'll read you backwards for that.

Yeah. You're from London? Yeah, I bought fashion house.

So you need to change. Up your.

No. We can go.

Okay, Daniel. Okay. Right.

Well, I guess. You guys get extra credit for attending, and, um, let's excuse it on the snow or something.

Okay, so so this year, we finally got to our final lecture.

And, um, this lecture is a little bit different from all the other lectures in that in this lecture, um, I would like to get into into how.

How will a policymaker or somebody who wants a career in policymaking in the different positions of policymaking,

how how to view yourself and how to view the world?

And so it's gonna be a bit weird, huh? Okay.

But then let me let me recap a little bit about, you know, many things we we have addressed during the course.

You know, one is where place is poor. And our preferred answer is that the police are poor because they mobilizing relatively little knowledge.

Then in order to change the world. You need to know how to change.

You know, humans need to change the world to survive because there's no such thing as hamburger trees.

You on a hamburger? There's a lot of stuff you have to do in the world, right?

And in the process of doing that, you mobilize knowledge.

And knowledge is this distributed thing where, you know, a minuscule fraction of what society knows.

So this knowledge gets grouped in kind of like atoms of knowledge.

And those are the letters. And these letters combine so, so place for places tend to be places where there are relatively few letters.

And, and with few letters you can make few words.

And short words may be the problem in a particular place is that it's hard to put these letters together.

We know that no place is self-sufficient, so they need to trade for the things that they can't or don't want to make.

And as a consequence, a, you know, exports play a very big role.

And whether you're talking about a country or you're talking about a municipality, right.

Things that you can do here and sell outside of here are the things that are going to allow you to buy the things that you cannot right here.

Okay. Why are places volatile?

Well, in part of it's because they also have few letters and because they have few letters that make two words and that makes them relatively,

um, diversified. So any shock to a particular industry, we're just going to have more macro implications.

So if in Chile there's a shock to a price of copper, it's going to be a macro economically significant chunk, right.

So that's a reflection. And part of the fact that you have a relatively, um, diversifying the economy.

Right. And so. They and they are also they may be poorly connected to international capital markets,

financial markets where you might be able to borrow in bad times, save in good times so that you can, you know, manage shocks.

And you might be poorly connected to international finance because of original sin, etc.

So these are all things we covered during the course.

They might also have a weak fiscal institutions, uh, you know, running a budget strain.

Why? It's a hard thing, right?

It has chicken and egg. Oh, chicken and egg, chicken and lobster problems.

Right. And and so on. Why are countries unequal?

Well, again, because they have very poorly distributed letters that there's like two makes.

Right. So and and letters want to, want to be in places where other letters are.

So you end up having places that have a lot of letters and then places that have very few letters.

And you're going to face a problem of, are you going to put some letters everywhere and or put all letters somewhere?

But obviously if you put all letters somewhere, many possibilities will arise there, but then very few opportunities will arise elsewhere.

But if you put some letters everywhere, you might get nothing everywhere.

Right? So this trade off is a complicated trade off.

It's going to generate a lot of regional inequalities within a country.

It's going to generate a lot of a regional, uh, in spatial inequalities within cities, because not all parts of the city are equally accessible.

It's costly to. System and so and and transportation costs,

commute costs of people going to work are going to be a significant friction in the process of being able to combine your letters with other letters.

That's going to be aggravated by the fact that more people have to live farther away because they can't outcompete others in and in location,

but they are also less able to afford cars, and so they have to rely more on forms of transportation that take more time, they take money, etc.

So he may be disconnected from labor market opportunities.

And all of these things are going to translate into inequalities in a, in a productivity.

So that there's a lot about inequality.

That's not so much about how is the pie distributed, but about the fact that different places can bake pies of very different sizes.

Right.

So inequalities in productivity, part of it has to do with the fact that connecting your letter to other letters involves paying some fixed cost.

And these fixed costs generate these bad equilibria that because you're poor, I don't connect you.

And because I don't connect you, you are disconnected, unable to combine your letters.

Consequently, you're poor. And that ways around these this problem require a lot of attention.

And it means that in.

A US strategy to reduce inequality might involve telling people to connect.

We call that strategies of inclusion as opposed to strategies of redistribution and that redistribution.

In some sense, it's palliative. Inclusion is curative.

Some interventions might be both inclusive and redistributive, but these are dimensions that we want to keep in mind.

Okay. So I'm going to talk in the next five minutes or maybe seven eight about the development community.

A. About society.

So the development community in the next seven minutes, I don't think they deserve more.

Maybe I'm going to talk about, you know, how should we think about the society we live in.

And then I want to talk about you and how you view the world or your options on how to view the world.

So the international development industry,

if you want a is based on the idea that people have goals and you can list the goals that people might have.

They need food, they need housing, they need education, they need health.

They need energy. They need water.

They need personal security. They need transportation.

They need communication. They need and, you know, international security, they need human rights, etc.

So these are all fine goals. And if you think about them, different parts of the development community is focused on different ones of these goals.

Right. So we have the f a o on food.

You have Unesco on education, you have the World Health Organization and so on and so forth.

Then you have organizations, different kinds of organizations.

You have multilateral organizations. You have bilateral organizations.

You have national donor government agencies.

So, for example, the US Treasury has development assistance to other treasuries and other countries.

And, you know, we share knowledge and stuff, right?

You have ministries. You have governors, by the way.

All of these things are potential employers, right? So you have private global donors.

You know, we don't have gates. We have business, you have NGOs, you have multinationals, you have national corporations, you have SMEs,

you have micro-enterprises, you have consulting firms that in some sense mobilize knowledge, help, think problems.

Do you have banks? Right. You have microfinance institutions.

You have the media and then you have universities, thinktanks research centers.

And then you have instruments or instruments or things you can use to to impact the world.

Right? You have rules. You have taxes and subsidies.

You have pre investment. That is a pre investment is the kind of activities that happen before you can have an investment project.

No. Before you have an investment project you have to think about what an investment what investment project you would do.

And I personally think that countries pay in general too little attention to these pre

investment activities because you ask yourself where did the idea of the project come from,

who's thinking about the idea of the project etc. And.

You have grants, you have concessional loans.

You have project loans. You have policy loans.

You have guarantees. You have foreign direct investment, you have venture capital, you have technical assistance, you have benchmarking.

You know, if you want to stop corruption, then you create the Transparency International and you create indices and then you name and chain,

etc. you have standards, you have certifications, you have knowledge.

So all of these are in some sense different ways.

Each one of them is, you know, a whole world in itself and how you might.

Participate in, in the world.

Now there's going to be a, um, I'm going to develop this tripartite network where you have an institution, a you have issues.

For example, institution is the world Bank. It deals with a [INAUDIBLE] of a lot of different issues.

Right. And then you have countries. So is this a national institution cares only about a country or is this like a world Bank.

It cares about all countries or etc. So so imagine this, this tripartite network.

And then you have these kinds of processes where people try to agree on goals and they list kind of goals.

And it and the idea is that.

That the that you're going to try to coordinate somehow these development agencies the these players in this field with, with these goals.

Okay. And so the current approach on how we are going to organize the development community is that we have to agree on goals,

things like the Sustainable Development Goals, and then we'll have national governments draw plans based on those goals.

And then you're going to convene a the donors to try to help the country achieve those goals.

Okay. Presumably the governments have to own their programs, uh, in the processes that they have to write the poverty reduction strategy paper,

convene a consultative group, and then allocate responsibilities between the donors.

Okay. Um, for example, the Millennium Development Goals, which preceded the Sustainable Development Goals, they had, uh, ten goals.

Now these ones have 17. But in the Millennium Development Goals and there are no goals for jobs for the non poor.

You can say that that's true also for the Sustainable Development Goals.

There's nothing about housing, nothing about energy, nothing about roads, nothing about urban transport, nothing about policing and security.

So you can imagine that these are the goals.

Who set the goals? 170 presidents that attended a meeting.

Now, if the goals are set by 170 presidents who attended a meeting back when, what's the point of elections?

Why would you have elections if the goals are already said?

This isn't politics about deciding what's important and what we should pay attention to.

When was the last time you saw in the US presidential election saying,

I am the one that's going to to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, right?

I mean, the whole political process is about setting goals.

So I have been allergic to this approach, and because I've been allergic to this approach, aim, um,

I developed an alternative way of, of looking at this approach and let me show you what we did.

Okay. So the idea here is that the current approach is a kind of like a hierarchical approach where everything is kind of like top down.

The goals are set first, then the governments have to own those goals even though they did not participate in the setting.

Uh, so I'm going to propose to you want to now turn up the, uh, um, what is it?

Where is it? Right here. International development is a complex global effort that faces daunting coordination problems.

International development arose from two trends that mark the history of the past two centuries.

First is the great divergence of incomes per capita across the regions of the world.

In 1820, the richest country in the world.

Probably the Netherlands, was about four times richer than the poorest country in the world.

Now, the difference between the richest and poorest country is more than 101.

At the same time, the number of sovereign states went from less than 50 back in 1945 to more than 200 today.

This means that while before the differences in incomes happened within large multi-ethnic empires like the British or the French,

today it involves different sovereign states as a consequence.

Delivering development assistance now involves crossing borders, and this requires international institutions.

In the early days, a few institutions were created, such as the Red cross, the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions.

But over the course of time, many more were created, including those created by individual rich country governments,

the so-called bilateral institutions like USAID or David, while many private foundations emerged to lend their hand.

As a consequence, the field now involves hundreds of donors.

Development assistance also started with few topics centered around infrastructure, education, and health.

But then it moved into others, adding issues of industrial development, trade,

human rights, environmental protection, gender equality, governance and many more.

So more countries, more donors and more issues have made international development much more complex.

How would you go about coordinating this effort? Suppose you try to match one country with one donor agency to work on one issue.

You would have several hundred thousand possible combinations.

Now suppose you wanted to involve two aid agencies instead of one.

You would have been tens of millions of possible combinations.

And if it were three agencies you try to coordinate. You would have billions of possible combinations.

How would you go about coordinating all organizations and all countries to work on all issues?

So far, we have tried to organize this process using hierarchies, just like a modern corporation or an army.

The current approach requires countries to first agree on the Millennium Development Goals that they are supposed to follow.

Then an individual country is supposed to write a poverty reduction strategy paper consistent with the Millennium Development Goals.

Then they are supposed to convene round tables or consultative groups to allocate tasks among donor agencies.

On the internet, you can literally find millions of documents produced for these groups.

But such hierarchical structures become very cumbersome as the number of entities involved and the issues to be addressed increase in number.

Instead, a more network structure can allow the system to self-organize without a hierarchical command structure.

Willing donors and willing recipients can coordinate on goals that they both share,

without the need for all donors and recipients to agree on the same goals for all countries as the MDGs currently require them to do,

and that's where the aid explorer comes into play. We built a system that transforms speech on the web into information that can

facilitate matching countries with aid agencies that share their interests.

We look at how frequently aid agencies talk about each other, about each country, and about each issue.

We also look at how frequently countries talk about the different issues.

So what can you do with the aid explorer? Let's consider Bolivia.

Suppose you wanted to support micro enterprises in Bolivia.

You would want to know which aid agencies care about Bolivia and which aid agencies care about micro-enterprises.

Hopefully you could find one that cares about both.

With the aid explorer, you can generate more than 25,000 such graphs, but this may be too difficult for some users with the aid explorer.

You can relate any organization or development issue with a country and see at a glance whether the agencies that care.

About the country. Also care about the issues that the country cares about.

Good job. International cooperation and development fund. You can aggregate the information over all of Bolivia's issues for Bolivia.

Microenterprise is one example that works for organizations that care about Bolivia, also care about Microenterprise.

But apparently nobody is focused on creating jobs in Bolivia.

You can rank organizations in terms of how well they match the priorities of the countries they work with.

You can rank countries in terms of how well they're matched with agencies that share their priorities.

And Bolivia is not doing that great, actually. And how able is the international community to coordinate on different issues,

highlighting some tough ones, especially those related to economic growth?

The Bolivia story and a thousand more are just a click away in the Aid Explorer website.

We hope you will find it useful to improve on the current state of aid coordination.

Okay. So. That's the, um.

The alternative to instead of coordinating through these.

These hierarchical structures where we have to agree on goals.

I, I have a particular allergy to agreeing on goals because in some sense, if you have to, if the top agrees on goals, it disempowers everybody else.

Yeah, it takes goal setting out of the political process.

Anyway. Um, so okay, so that's what I wanted to share with you on, um, international development.

I mean, many goals, many organizations, many instruments, many issues, many different ways to play this game.

Too complex for us to be too centrally planned, but plenty of opportunities to do interesting things in that space.

Okay, so now I want to I want to describe society in a way that it might clarify what potential roles there are in society to play.

I've been very much impressed by this idea that societies are machines that need for their existence to process knowledge,

to use knowledge, and knowledge has something to do with brains.

So I thought it's interesting to look at some metaphor between how the brain is organized and how society is organized.

Okay, so I'm going to do a metaphor of the social brain, but I'm going to base it on what we understand about the structure of the brain.

Okay. So our model of the individual brain.

Say following Danny Kahneman and.

Is that it has two systems. Right. It has really four systems.

But uh, one of them is system one.

This thinking fast system one is fast.

It's involuntary where you you know, it's there, you don't control it.

And it's effortless here.

You don't have to concentrate, etc. it's all operating. It's unconscious in the same way as know how it's unconscious.

It's impossible to turn off that you have to go to sleep or something, but even there, it's doing its thing.

It's almost impossible to verbalize because it doesn't think conceptually.

And it's what you use when you're an expert at doing something.

When you look at the violin concerto, you say, how the [INAUDIBLE] he does it?

How would I ever. Well, he's not thinking.

It's, you know, it's going through. So that's system one, right?

Evolutionarily, system one is very old. We share it with many, many other animals.

System two, by contrast, is slow. It requires effort.

It has very limited bandwidth.

So it requires you to concentrate and decide what are you going to be paying attention to?

Right. It requires explicit reasoning and deduction.

It's more conceptual. It's much easier to verbalize because you're actually thinking conceptually.

And we have a word for concept for every concept and so on.

So in it's typically what you use when you are a beginner at something.

So for example, I remember when I was in college and friends of mine were taking courses in Spanish and they would ask me,

how do you say, I wish I could go? And so I would tell them how I would say.

And he says, oh, really? You use the power pass part to say, oh, I don't know what the [INAUDIBLE] I know, right?

I mean, I cannot, but that's kind of like how, how a beginners walk right in and it's evolutionary,

much more recent and and but system two thinks it's you.

In reality you are 90% system one, 10% system two.

But system two is the only one that is conscious about about being thinking and being aware.

The other one is kind of like automatic and operational. So we you've heard about system one and system two before.

Right. I'm going to complement that with two more instruments.

One of them is an attention management system.

System two has very little bandwidth. So somebody has to some other process has to decide what is system two going to pay attention to.

Okay. Okay. So you might be doing, you know, some some work etc.

And suddenly I don't know, uh, a tornado comes around and suddenly you have to stop what you do and figure out how, you know.

So. So something overrides what you're currently paying attention to because you should be paying attention to something else.

Okay. So that's the attention mechanism. And very interestingly, there's this concept which a what's the name of this guy?

A Uh.

Matthew, he has a fantastic book about the structure of the brain.

Um, and the book has a great, great name.

More of that in the book is called self Comes to Mind.

That is in the theory of the mind. How does the mind work?

The mind needs to create a self.

There has to be an agent. That is undergoing all these experiences and processing all these experiences that it's undergoing.

And and in order to process those experiences, the mind needs to have a sense of a transcendence.

So it's not that this is what's happening to me in this second,

and this is what happens to me in this other second or five minutes down the road, etc.

It has to be sort of like the same person that has,

or you have to have the illusion that the same person has been going through all of these experiences.

So you're processing whatever is happening to you in light of what has happened to you before,

and for that, you have to create this idea in your mind that you are the same person that was here,

say, a couple of minutes ago, or that was here yesterday, that was here or here a year ago or ten years ago.

Right. And that, that, that, that and you can tell kind of like a story of who you are, right?

That is what they call the autobiographical self. And without that, I'm, you know, you cannot function.

The the brain needs that that autobiographical self to process information.

Oh, by the way, sadly ehm.

In Alzheimer. A distorts this autobiographical self and people start being extremely disoriented because they cannot,

they cannot create a coherent view of the world. They cannot process the new information of the world.

Okay, so. A.

So essentially you as a person do what system one wants unconsciously you to be doing.

Until system two says no, you should be paying attention to X and consciously thinking about what you're going to do next,

etc. and system two is going to do that because your attention mechanism is going to say, you know, pay attention to X, right.

And system two is going to be analyzing and processing this new information

in light of this sense of this autobiographical sense of self that you have.

Okay. So it's kind of like a description of your brain.

Okay. Now I'm going to take a metaphor and say this is a description of your brain that makes kind of sense, right?

That's what the brain is like I would say you could think that society has essentially the same structure.

Okay. Societies have systems one and systems one are the processes that kind of happen naturally, right?

You know. Right. We are now in the admissions process, you know, deadline for admissions whatever.

And you know, we require three letters of recommendation. And we record this and require a committee.

And and these these are automatic things that happen every year.

We don't think about them. They're just the way things are. Okay.

Em, they're super important. They presume a lot of things, right?

There are some roles. Two people. A you know that that are.

It's kind of like system one. There are automatic to you. Aim.

They might include in that automatic part a lot of prejudices.

Right? Because that's the way things are. You don't think about them.

You know them. System two is going to be effortful, right?

It's going to be required. For example, why the [INAUDIBLE] do we do the ah, admissions process the way we do our admissions process.

Is it fair, for example? E are we treating foreign students and domestic students on the same footing?

Are we putting different kinds of barriers and obstacles to different, uh, groups?

And are we discriminating somehow? Right.

Uh, are we overly recommending people we know as opposed to being more open?

So so that would require more effort for looking at the processes you have right now.

You cannot do that about all the processes you have because there are too many of them.

And most of them we just leave on automatic and you pay attention to a few of them.

So, for example, the legislative agenda of a of a government is not necessarily limited by the fact that, you know,

you have just so many people in Congress, they have to talk to each other, etc. we cannot be approving too many laws in one year.

So something in the system has to decide what the system two is going to pay attention to.

Should we be discussing global warming this year?

Should we be discussing migration? Should we be discussing crime nor what?

What should we be paying attention to? Okay. And there is a mechanism through which society ends up paying attention to things.

A lot of, for example,

advocacy groups are in the business of trying to increase the salience that society societal discussions give to different officials.

Right. So that's that that's what their businesses and in some sense, people like Marshall Ganz know, teach them,

you know, how you organize to impact all the attention that society gives to the issues you care about.

Okay. And then there's the autobiographical self and the author.

Where we're ethical selves is is what we have called in this course the sense of us.

It's, you know, what does it mean to be Albanian, who we are as Albanians?

What do we Albanians naturally aspire to?

If I want to have a government that's going to do things for us, what the [INAUDIBLE] does it means to do things for us?

If I'm Albanian and how would it be different from a sense of us if I'm Pakistani or if I'm Nigerian or if I'm whatever.

Right. So. Okay, so. So essentially you have at the level of society these four components.

Uh. And by the way, you're going to be some of you.

You're going to go out there. And you're going to end up being some of you in system one.

And system one includes a lot of tasks that are important to perform without which societies can't operate.

Some of you might go to system two. This is the part which is thinking.

So we keep on doing things this way. Should we rethink the way we do our things, etc.?

Some of you might end up and all going to the attention mechanism, trying to influence what societies pay attention to.

And some of you might be trying to reinvent a society sense of us know, redefine who we are as a society, what know what makes us us?

What should our natural aspirations be? What what, given that sense of us, what is logical for us to be doing given who we are?

Right? So it's it's political. Entrepreneurship is a lot about redefining this sense of us.

Okay. So. So that's why I've been trying to describe for you what roles are there about out there in the world to be played in.

And, you know, given though that.

Universe of possible roles. Which ones do you want to think about for your career?

Yeah. So.

Ehm, now I want to. I want to go to a different point and a different place.

And this different place is about.

Asking ourselves what kind of answers we are looking for in the world.

What kind though? What constitutes a satisfactory answer to a question?

For example, if I tell you why, I ask why are so many countries poor?

What constitutes a satisfactory answer? I'm going to say that this is philosophically a very complicated question.

It's too complicated. So I'm going to not answer this question.

I'm going to answer a simple question. Okay.

And the simple question that I'm going to ask is, why are so many of us fat?

Okay. I have constantly played through my life.

You know, I, I think I don't I don't know how many diets I must have lost, tons of, you know, several tons of weight over the course of my lifetime.

Right now. Why are so many people fat?

So there is an answer to that question, and there's a scientific answer to that question.

It says because they consume more calories, they they eat more calories than they burn.

Right? That's why they gain weight, right?

Is that a correct answer? Yes, it's a correct answer.

Right. So if this is the answer, what if this is a question?

What's the answer? Well, you need to change the balance.

You need to eat less and burn more calories right.

So you need to change your diet and you have to exercise.

So if we we are completely.

Satisfied with the answer, right? Okay, but then why are so many people fat?

And. Here you need a different kind of answer, right?

Because if if there was a problem and there was a clear solution and so on, why didn't people just adopt the solution we have?

We have told them what to do. Right? So it's it's clear. It's obvious we know.

So why does the problem persist. And here there are two different kinds of answers.

One is that no, the problem of is, is is some kind of moral failing.

Either they're failing in some moral sense or problem is not physics thermodynamics.

Right. It's it's a it's a they don't have the right moral fiber.

So now we've changed the, the space of, of answers.

And we're just because they don't know. They don't know.

They, they haven't figured this one out. Right. So so now it's a problem of ignorance.

It's not a problem of thermodynamics. Okay.

All right. So. I'm going to argue that in a lot of the discussions you have about policy,

these issues arise that you're thinking about what kind of what kind of an answer you're looking for.

And there's kind of like a technical answer at some level that doesn't really cut it because the problem persists,

even though it has kind of like a technical answer. I'm going to give you.

Some elaboration on this. So I'm going to say that science really provides snippets of truth.

Truth is kind of like an archipelago.

That's surrounded by a lot of unknowns, a lot of water.

If you want, we have islands of truth surrounding by a lot of water.

Right. So there might be some analytical truths that you are able to establish about

some connection between calories and weight or between education and growth.

But most of the questions that you want to answer about the world requires much more than that.

So you fill in the blanks with your beliefs. You need to have these beliefs because by pure science you are not going to answer any question.

You. I don't know how many of you have read papers on RCTs, right?

And the paper in RCT establishes beyond reasonable doubt that in this particular location,

in this particular experiment, this thing did more than that thing, right?

What are you supposed to take away from that? How do you go from that finding to action?

Well, you need a thousand other assumptions about the world and about, etc. to do.

Right. So you have to fill in the blanks. And I'm going to argue that there are certain ways in which you fill in the blanks and the way.

And I'm going to argue that there's in particular three different paradigms on how you fill the blanks in answering these questions.

Okay. Um, the first one of these paradigms, how do you fill the blanks is called God is in Control.

Also call it God is Great. So God is in control.

God is all powerful, all omnipotent, and so on.

So the world is under active management. Okay.

The world is under active management. God is there looking.

And in essence, in this world, people deserve what they get. So you know something bad happens to you.

It must be punishment for for something you did right.

And because the world is very big and God is busy in many things, God needs some angels to do God's work.

And one of the angels that God uses to do their work is capital markets.

Right? Capital markets are there to punish countries that misbehave and to reward countries that behave right?

So if you do things well, your capital markets are going to bestow on you their appreciation and love.

And if you misbehave, they'll punish you. So. That's how now you you see Wall Street as.

Uh, you know, God's purview.

Right. So if this is your view of the world, um, then why do individual countries get into trouble?

They get into trouble because we know stuff about calories and exercise and stuff.

Right. So we know that you need more savings, and so you have to forego current consumption.

You have to control your fertility, etc. And if you do those things and the economy will grow, but you don't because your moral failings.

Right. Or, you know, you need to have stable macro, but to have stable macro you need fiscal and monetary responsibility.

But you are irresponsible in your fiscal monetary policy.

That's why you get into trouble, right? And so on.

And the problem is, you know, corruption, rent seeking, whatever.

So we need these these things under control.

But if you don't control them etc., so you see them, the problems on the world are basically people not doing what they should do.

Okay. So they are in the end.

They're getting what they deserve because they did not behave as they should have behaved.

People who behave well go to heaven. If you're in [INAUDIBLE], ask yourself, what did you do to end up in [INAUDIBLE]?

So if this is your view of the world, then you're going to be tempted to have one role in that world.

And your role in the world is to pontificate.

You're there to kind of explain people what it is that they're doing wrong, that they should do differently, that show them the path to virtual.

Okay, I'm going to argue that one paradigm of how to view the world.

Right. A second paradigm on how to view the world is that God needs you.

God is powerful, but not super powerful.

Okay. Um. Um, so God is not in control of everything that happens in the world because there is evil in the world.

And and God is fighting evil.

And God needs you to fight evil on.

On his behalf. Okay. So there's there's evil in the world.

And then. And the problems in the world are not caused by your moral failings, but by evil in the world.

Somebody else's moral failing, if you want. You are the victim.

So. So the problems in the world are caused by these evil doers.

Now, depending on your ideology, you might choose who is evil, right?

So maybe it's corporations are evil, right?

The reason why there's global warming is because we have these oil corporations that want to make money, right?

Not that you're using your car, but you know that. Or that the reason why there are these problems in the world, isn't it?

Because the deep state or a, you know, there's this, uh, cabal of people trying to control society, etc., right?

So, so deep down, that's the origin of problems in the world.

And if that's your description of the world, then you can ask yourself a question.

What's your role in this world? Well, your role in this world is obviously you have to fight evil,

who you are motivated by this hatred of evil, by this fight against evil, you are fighting.

On behalf of the good. Against evil. That's your view of the world.

Okay. Now, I must say that.

For 15 years I. I was the director of of the center for International Development.

And, you know, development was at some time, at some point in time.

Goal! And a goal about something that's supposed to be good.

So development is supposed to be good, but you could not get anybody excited by fighting for good.

You get much more people excited by fighting against bad.

Okay, so suddenly you saw this generalization of the idea that the development is really about fighting poverty.

Right. So it's about fighting the bad. It's not.

No.

If you say prosperity, no, that sounds like banal or people to very focused on on, you know, where their wealth and, you know, opulence or whatever.

But if you are fighting some bad, you get more, more excitement.

Okay, so that's a second part, by the way, and I want you to be thinking about your friends and colleagues.

What motivates them? Is it is it, uh, God is in control or God needs you, etc.

And then there's a third paradigm, right? And that third paradigm is calling.

A God is busy, otherwise engaged.

No God the universe going and then start to do other things.

And so we are alone. So and because there's no active management out here, you know, um, [INAUDIBLE] happens.

And [INAUDIBLE] happens. And we don't know why [INAUDIBLE] happens, right?

But the is, you know, we need to figure out.

And and so your role here is to understand what problems are out there, you know, what might be causing them, etc.

I do they have a fix, etc. Okay, so.

Huh. No.

No big role for evil per se. It's not that these problems are motivating.

No, just, you know, [INAUDIBLE] happens, right? So I don't know what motivates you.

But I would say that we have we use our belief about the world in some sense to protect our psychological well-being.

These are protective interpretations of of the world that makes us be able to cope with the world.

Okay. So I'm going to give you an example.

You know, if I come to you and I say. You know, there's a lot of hunger in country X.

I don't know. Pick your country. This is a lot of trouble, you know.

Country. Why? So it's kind of like. Oh, look at this disaster.

There's happening in country Z doesn't make you feel well, right?

And. You know, there's a Woody Allen character who says, uh,

you can never be happy because there's so much suffering in the world that it prevents him from ever being happy.

Right. Because you think about all the bad things that happen in the world.

So let's take this, this example. Suppose that you hear about a friend dying in an accident.

Okay. So your dear friend died in a traffic accident.

Okay. It's a tragedy. It's a tragedy.

No. The friend died.

That's. That's a given. Okay.

It's a tragedy. It's horrible. It's a tragedy now.

There are two possible stories of what happened and what's one story.

You know, the guy who was out partying was driving back home.

Might have had a couple of extra drinks. Got killed in an air traffic accident.

The other one is that, you know, the guy. This happened in the morning.

Guy was taking his kids to school right after dropping him down.

A truck came running over on his car, and the guy died.

Okay. Which story would you prefer to hear?

Um. The first. Okay. Why?

Because you could say it was his fault. It was his fault.

So he kind of, like, deserved it and that kind of thing. How many of you have gone out partying?

So. So you see that in some sense.

If I tell you now, why is this country undergoing this thing?

You would prefer to hear a story that would be more tolerable to you, right?

Because otherwise you'd be this Woody Allen character where I can never be happy because there's too much suffering in it.

So I think that we end up choosing our interpretations of the world.

So, you know, if you are, somebody is poor in some sense, they deserve it.

If they deserve it. I can sleep better because yes, they're poor, etc. and there might be suffering,

but there's some, as Juan Pablo said, you know, I think that's about it.

I know, but my point is not to take sides.

My point is just to show that we are, that these are processes that are happening in my mind, in our minds.

Yes. Ronnie, what do you think about this sort of approach to determinism?

We can do not think about anything. Um.

I mean, I think that.

It is somewhat useless because we have the illusion that we make decisions.

Right. But we have to live in the illusion.

We cannot walk away from that illusion. Now, it may be that in the end, we come up with a decision of an action that we take.

But if you tell me, I would have taken that decision anyway. So what's the point of thinking about it?

Well, I don't I cannot imagine how I would live in that parallel.

I agree with you, but the more serious note, um, saying what you said about the Woody Allen character was like,

how can we be happy when there is that hunger all the time?

It kind of feeding on, like, the developed countries don't care too much about what happens in the developed countries,

or at least don't think we can make actually change, because I've always put so much more money into, don't you think?

Well, I absolutely worry about, for example, if you tell them that there's a hurricane in in New Orleans,

they'll cough up an enormous amount of money bigger than if you tell them that there was a hurricane in Indonesia.

Right. So so our sense of loyalty, responsibility and so on is is very much mediated by bye bye things like that.

And so. So, um, I find it interesting when I, when I engage in conversations with people, what motivates them?

So why are they analyzing a problem?

For example, in right now I talk a lot to Venezuelan opposition and the Venezuelan opposition is out of government, so they feel very disempowered.

So if you analyze a problem like why is there so much crime in Venezuela?

Why is your family so doing so poorly?

They're not necessarily looking for solutions because what are they going to do with a solution?

Just more frustration, more awareness of the fact that they don't have agency, they don't have a capacity to influence over power and so on.

So what they're really looking for is another reason to make blame,

to make people aware that the, you know, we need to get rid of these [INAUDIBLE], right?

So the motivation is looking for ways in which you can assign blame more than the search for solutions.

And I think that this is an important distinction. Are you looking for solutions or are you looking for blame.

Okay. That's that's one question you might want to ask yourself.

And there are societies or groups in society that are more focused about identifying problems and thinking about solutions.

And then once you start thinking about solutions, you find that solutions require cooperation.

And most things in the world are not done by individuals.

They're done by groups. Right? Products tend to be not single letter products.

They tend to be longer words. Longer words require cooperation between the different letters.

So. But there is a big discussion as to whether cooperation is an important part of what you're striving for.

Because in some sense, I mean.

You can have these two basic different views about the nature of cooperation in society.

A you know, Marx said that the history of all hitherto existing societies is the history of class struggle.

So if you want to make progress, you have to fight.

So it's a struggle. And you've heard that, you know, the arc of history is long,

but it bends towards justice because people have been struggling in against injustice over the years.

Right. And so, so progress is, is is through struggle.

And then struggle means some kind of confrontation.

Right?

As opposed to, you know, the history of humanity is the history of expanding forms of cooperation that we used to cooperate in very small bands.

Then in larger tribes, we eventually became nation states.

And then now these nation states try to coordinate at the international level.

And if anything, you know what? What has driving has driven history forward is this ability to form ways of cooperating at larger scales.

Okay. But you have these two narratives coexisting out there.

Is it about struggle? Is it about cooperation?

Those are kind of two very different. Motivations or feelings or mechanisms.

Okay. So.

Let me ask myself now. Okay, so. So this is a kind of a description of the world that I've been making for you.

And I'm asking myself. What could be your motivations?

Okay, so what's in it for you in this world?

Okay. Now, there's one paradigm out there.

And this paradigm would say that, you know, you you know, you're going to in a few months, get out of here with a diploma.

That diploma certifies that you're an expert, okay?

And you understand what what's best for society.

You can figure out what's best for society. You can calculate what's in the public interest.

So you can take kind of like a social planner's worldview.

No other people don't take that position.

They just think about themselves. You think about other people.

You think about society as a whole. They think about themselves.

Okay. And and therefore they are kind of morally inferior to you.

You care about the whole. And everybody else is just out for themselves.

Right. And so you shouldn't be listening to them too much because you're going to be captured or fooled by people who have vested interests.

Okay. They know in this world politicians really add negative value, right?

They they they destroy value. They they're only interested in getting reelected.

Right? And they don't necessarily have the conceptual tools with which to understand the problems.

They, they, you know, they can't understand the problems for themselves.

So it's looking a little bit like in medicine, you know, disease is a very complicated thing.

So you don't make medical decisions yourself.

You, you take, uh a doctor, you might decide on how to choose the doctor,

but once you've chosen the doctor, you want to follow the instructions of the doctor.

And you are the doctor. Right.

And when you think about your considerations of what to propose.

You understand efficiency. You understand that there are inefficient ways of doing things.

There are efficient ways of doing things. And you are about optimizing the solution, right?

Because you're not a politician. So if you got excited by anything I've said in these last two slides, I must say that we are deeply sick.

And not only are you sick, right, but you are poised for failure.

You are setting yourself up for a big fiasco and you're going to be disappointed about the world.

Get nowhere and blame the world for it. Okay, so let me deconstruct a little bit.

What's wrong with this view of yourself? Okay.

You are not a social planner. You are one more agent in this world that's trying to do what they find valuable, right?

Uh, if you ever get into the policy world, you will have delegated authority.

Somebody will give you responsibility over something,

and you'll face the problem of they want you to do something for them, but you want to do something for yourself.

So you're an agent, you're going to have the principal agent problem, even if you honestly think you are there for the public interest.

Everybody else thinks that they have an agent, that you have an agency problem, okay?

And they'll think that you are doing things for yourself now.

And as a consequence, they are going to restrict your choices.

They're not there to make your life easier.

And that's why we have constitutions. That's why we have laws.

That's why we have things that constrain your choices.

I like to say that when I was minister 30 years ago, it was the period of my life where I felt I had the least power.

Because everything I wanted to do depended on other people.

Like here at Harvard, the things I want to do, I can more or less do.

But when I was minister, the things I wanted to do depended on the cabinet going along, the Parliament going along, public opinion coming along.

So so you feel that it's like, you know, Im swimming in molasses, but.

So I would say that it's good to have understanding why people might distrust you.

For example, you do not know the price of a quart of milk, right?

Do you? That's a typical question in an election.

Why is it a typical question in an election? It's to tell the politician.

Do you have any idea of what it means to live my life?

Do you understand my constraints? If you want to optimize, do you have any clue as to what it is that is important to me and so on.

So that's one of the reasons why we distrust. They they don't think that you understand what they are in.

Secondly, you are rich. Now, you might not feel rich right now because you're in a period of your life with negative cash flows.

But, you know, there's a definition of being rich, which is a riches, a person that has more money than me.

So it's kind of like self-referential. So you will never be rich by definition, right?

But if you objectively look at the world and especially, you know, if you don't really waste your Harvard diploma, you will be rich, right?

In addition, you speak English, which is, uh, you know, it will gain the distrust of the president of Mexico for sure.

And you have foreign contacts, right? You have a cabal of friends that they're, uh.

And maybe when you're in government, you think you want to do what's good for your country,

but maybe you care about your reputation in government, not vis-a-vis everybody but vis-a-vis somebody who might give you your next job.

Maybe the next thing you want to do is work at the world Bank or at the, you know, at some of the regional development banks or whatever, right.

And so you would want to do things that will increase your standing in those organizations.

Okay. And finally, you talk funny, right?

And you use jargon that other people don't understand.

You kind of use your jargon strategically to make them.

Make them think that you really know stuff, right?

So. I mean, this alternative world.

Politicians are focused on reelecting themselves because those are the rules we set out for them.

We gave them a short leash because we don't want them to go and do the things.

We want them to come back to us, to reauthorize them, to keep on doing what they do.

They are the Darwinian survivors of a very competitive process.

You know, if you're working your ass off in the election and at the ninth election, suddenly you realize that you don't have a job, right?

Very few people subject themselves to those kinds of risks.

Okay. By the way, they're there to represent voters.

So your role is not just to convince them, but to help them make the case publicly.

Right. So it's not I want to have the ear of the of the king.

It doesn't work that way. It's they're not doing whatever they want.

They do whatever they think they're voting based wants, okay.

They talk to people you don't talk to. And that's how they get to know what's in the utility function of other people.

Right. And so because of this, you it's not enough just to convince a politician.

You have to allow them to convince the country.

So if you know what's best and if others have particular interests, why let them participate in public policy?

You're setting yourself for a very dictatorial, authoritarian setup, and you do not know what people want.

And there are no social planners. The public interest is not really something that exists ex-ante.

The public interest is an emergent property of a process.

It's what gets revealed as to through some kind of interaction,

what society ultimately wants done through a complicated aggregation of of preferences.

Right. So you have to ask yourself. Should we do the right thing or should we do things right?

That's, uh, a very. By the way, this is also in the psychological makeup of people.

Should we do the right thing or should we do things right? The right thing is about the what?

Doing things right is about the how some people are very focused on.

I'll do whatever, but I want to do it right. I don't care exactly what, but let's do it right.

Or some people say no, I only want to do what I think is the right thing to do.

Okay, so. If efficiency is about the how, not about the what, where, where does the what come from?

So how is some optimization function? Where does the water come from?

Well the walk. What is a moral judgment about what you want done in.

In a. I like to use to tell people, if you want to sell a policy, write a speech.

Where you make people cry. You want to connect to their moral fiber.

So they say yes, because they they kind of they're motivated.

You're tapping into their moral sense. Okay.

The good. So the what is about doing good and good is a moral judgment about what's good in the world.

And and the wet test comes from the tears.

Okay. So who are you? There are two possible conceptions of yourself here.

And only two. You're either a victim or you are a hero.

Those are the two ways of going through the world. Okay.

It has nothing to do with what happens to you. It's not because, you know, I went through a war or whatever.

You know, something happened to me. It's actually what you do with what happens to you.

So that's, uh, famous. Experience is not what happens to you.

It is what you do with what happens to you. It's, um.

So it's how you process. It's your liver that is processing your experiences in your life.

Okay. So, um, you have to ask yourself, are your goals legitimate?

I would say many people who come to my office say, well, you know, I am.

I had a good life. I was in a good family and I want to do good for others.

So that's why I'm in international development. So I want to help other countries do better.

But I want to I don't want to choose for them. I want to empower them.

So I want to be there, but not too much. Because if I'm too much, then I'm overtaking them.

So I want to.

