[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Do the. Books.

Go, but is equal to what is supposed to come to.

Oh. Yeah.

All right. So very good.

So in last class, AV, we got really excited with the conversation.

And so no we didn't finish. So this class I need to finish what I couldn't finish last time.

And then we still have the whole the whole class. So in in there are two concepts I wanted to introduce.

Uh, they were probably familiar to you. The first one is, uh, demographic window of opportunity,

and the second one is an assessment of how much this whole transition out of the Malthusian equilibrium,

how much has happened and what has their consequences.

So, um, hey, keep your name tags on so that I can address you.

Uh, first review is tomorrow.

And first problem set this group Monday night. So. Very good.

So the demographic transition involves typically, um, you know, you,

you go from a world of high birth rates and high death rates to a world of low birth rates and low death rates.

But in the transition, something happens. Typically the birth rate.

The death rate falls before the birth rate. And so in this transition you get a um population boom typically.

Okay. So this is a little bit you know, this is for a few countries.

This is India Pakistan China. So in 1960 India and Pakistan looked very similar in Pakistan.

The death rate fell a lot for a very long time before you started to see a decline in birth rate.

So this is going to generate a very rapid population growth in India.

It's sort of like it fell a little bit more, more consistently in both dimensions.

And so now if you compare Pakistan to India, their distances are bigger than they were at the beginning.

Okay. China started sort of like in some sense, I don't know if you want to call this more advanced.

And then it collapsed. Um, the fertility rate collapsed much faster.

Maybe the one child policy or maybe not, because one child policy starts like over here.

So it kind of predated the one start policy.

So if you were to compare now, you would find Pakistan here, India here and in China here.

I'm doing this for all the countries in the world here. So in blue you have the countries back when in 1968 and in red you have them in 2018.

So you see all the countries were kind of here and now they're all here.

So there there's been this collapse in fertility and mortality rates everywhere.

And everybody has been moving in in this direction with different slopes, but in this direction.

Now, as fertility rates decline, then you are going to have relatively fewer people that are young relative to people of working age.

So if you think of dependency ratios, what's the size of a young population relative to the working age population?

Call that the dependency ratio, the young dependency ratio.

You typically find that, uh, in poor countries there's a lot of kids per adult, okay.

And the old dependency ratio is the people over 65 divided by the working age population.

So in rich countries you typically get that the rich countries are old okay.

So there's like a one dependency ratio is the young.

Another dependency ratio is the old.

So you can think the total dependency ratio would be the young plus the old divided by the working age population.

But typically a the old are more expensive than the young.

That um, old people tend to want to live autonomously.

So we need an apartment beside the other, the young living with their families.

And so the old needs say a pension.

The young need just, you know, education or something.

So typically people think of an adjusted dependency ratio where they count an old person as worth four children in terms of cost of maintenance.

So, so they have like an adjusted dependency ratio. You can calculate both the unadjusted and the adjusted.

But if you do the kind of the adjusted dependency ratio, you tend to have something like this, okay.

That when you start the demographic transition the dependency ratio falls.

So it becomes things become easier because you have you have, uh, fewer dependents per working age person.

But eventually a society starts getting old because now fertility rates have declined.

You have fewer children, but one generation later you have more old people.

And this idea is what they call the demographic window of opportunity.

Or they call it also the demographic bonus. Okay, now the interesting thing is that these things are super slow.

They go, they're generational. So you can look either at the demographic window of opportunity of the countries that you're working on.

So for example. In Pakistan.

Pakistan dependency ratios are now falling.

They fell much earlier in India because, as I showed you, fertility rates declined earlier in India, in China.

A you know, China is now getting older. In Korea, it's already getting older, much faster.

So different countries are at different moments in this demographic window of opportunity.

Okay. And one of the things you need to do is to figure out where is your country, okay.

In this demographic window. Yes.

Um, how how do this idea, uh, interact with with another idea like countries that are, like, are having much less birthrates, have problem with, uh,

the working population that they need, uh, immigration and, um, like, uh, improve the economy,

for example, a lot of the European countries and I like, I just have like, like two left.

I tell people. Yeah. So these countries here, so the rich countries are all getting old.

And the question is, so you're having more and more pensioners per working person.

So dependency ratios are skyrocketing and social security systems are unsustainable.

And you know, a partial solution for them might be let's get more workers from somewhere else because we're not having babies.

So we are not producing our own workers. So for for these countries, maybe migration can be a solution.

It cannot be a solution for the world because we still have not seen any migration from Marx.

Also, um, so, um, for the world, it's not a problem,

but it might be a question of how do you want to redistribute the labor force of

the world if the old are in one place and the workers are in a different place?

But this begs the question of can you use this window of opportunity?

To get rich before you get old? Or are you getting old before you get rich?

Okay. And my $0.02 is that in Latin America, we are getting older, much faster than we're getting richer.

So, uh, and and then after the window of opportunity is gone, things become harder because.

Uh, you know, the demographic window of opportunity means three things.

It means you have more workers per capita. Okay?

That means you tend to have more savings,

because now you have people working age that are maybe thinking about their old age, saving for their old age.

You have more of them.

There are more workers, more savings and maybe more education because now you have more people working age relative to the young.

You have more taxpayers relative to students. So it's easier for the government to fund our big educational increase.

So the demographic window of opportunity might be make make the growth process easier.

No. Uh, this is a little bit what I have here.

I'm going to show you two ways of of of looking at this.

I did this in different moments. This side here is what we were talking about last, last class about, you know, what the Industrial Revolution meant.

The Industrial Revolution meant a big increase in productive knowledge.

And this positive interaction between productive knowledge, between science and technology.

If you want in between propositional knowledge about the nature of the world and prescriptive knowledge about how to change the world.

Now, science and technology if you want. So if you have this technological progress, this increases the need for human capital in the labor force.

And that increase in the human capital in the labor force leads to a supply response, more education.

But in order to be able to supply that more education, families need to have fewer children.

So if they can afford to educate, fewer children.

So there's this substitution between what Gary Becker called quality of the quantity of children versus quality of children.

Right. Okay.

So suddenly you have women having fewer children and more educated, so there's less demand for home work and more opportunities for market work.

So you have greater participation of women in the labor force.

So if you have more workers per capita, because both men and women are working in the market, and the next generation is going to have a better,

a more educated labor force will have higher incomes per capita and with higher incomes per capita.

You can you can accelerate this process. So this a little bit this is the escape from the Matthews Yang equilibrium.

This is another way of looking at it. Maybe a the stuff was triggered because there was better health and better.

Health means lower infant mortality rates.

Lower infant mortality rates means that now you can have fewer children and expect them to survive.

So you don't have to have that many children. But with fewer children, you have lower dependency ratios.

You have more people of working age. You have more female labor force participation because women don't are not tied with so many children at home.

You have more education, including women, and there's going to be an interaction between these things,

because higher education of women means higher opportunity.

Cost of staying at home. And that's going to lead to more workers per capita,

both because of the dependency ratio and because more women are working, might get more urbanization,

because the returns to education are higher in urban areas than in rural areas,

simply because you can combine your education with that of other people interacting with other people.

And you might have an easier adoption of technology because technology should be a complement of human capital.

So you get more adoption of technology, and this should all lead to higher incomes.

And with higher incomes you should be able to improve health and so on.

So you get these positive feedback loops.

Roy professor, we have seen in some places in the world was due to um, geographic based on uh, diversity climate.

It had better half way before 1800. Um, but as far as I know, we didn't see that happen.

Right, right. No, I think that a unless you have this.

Unless you have this mechanism here to generate, uh, um, an increase in the demand for quality of children versus quantity of children,

you may not see the collapse in fertility rates and and so on.

Yeah. So, so what I'm going to do now, now that we have all of these ideas super clear.

Yes. You think families might go through the demographic transition very differently depending on the occupations of fathers?

Because I'm what I'm thinking essentially is that if you're middle or upper

class and you want your kids to get into new good jobs and you can train them,

and maybe you move to this quality children earlier than if you're lower down

in the occupational ranks and your kids don't have much chance of getting in.

I mean, it is the case if you look, uh, all countries,

I've looked at fertility rates by income levels or fertility rates by by, uh, educational levels.

You tend to find that the, the rich get rich and the poor get children.

Um, so so yes, that that in general, fertility rates decline faster at the top of society than at the bottom of society.

For example, when I looked at these numbers for Venezuela, uh,

people with university education had a third of the number of children, of people without primary.

So that that's going to have the implication that there's going to be downward mobility.

And because, um, the number of children whose parents are highly educated.

Declines. Right. Because suppose you have a the population is a one person, highly educated and one person poorly educated.

Right. But the poorly educated has three kids and the highly educated has one child.

So now out of the four children, 75% are the children of lowly educated people.

Right. So that's that's going to generate kind of like a drag in the speed at which you can raise an educational attainment.

Now, what I'm going to try to do now is I'm going to just show you all of these numbers for the world, okay.

What happened, what has been happening in the world. And for that it's useful to understand this accounting relationship.

It's a little bit more than an accounting relationship, but GDP per capita is what percentage of people working age are there in the

population multiplied by how many of those of working age are working right?

So now this is you see working age population, working age population.

These are just workers per capita. But this is it has to do with demographics and, you know, age structure of the population.

And this has to do with participation rates including female labor force participation rates.

Oh come here. Okay. Times the productivity of the workers and the productivity of the workers should be somewhat

related to how educated all those workers with how much capital those workers are working with,

and with the technology with which these workers are working.

Okay. So I'm going to be looking at what's been happening to working age population as an answer or workers per capita.

Okay. What's been happening to female labor force participation rates?

What's been happening to education of workers? What's been happening to capital of workers over time for the world?

Okay. That's what we're trying to understand, how you know what's been happening to this dynamic.

All right. So by the way, this was done by Uli.

So yeah, this is life expectancy in 1980.

And this is the change in life expectancy. Unconditional convergence in life expectancy A would mean that everybody's here on a line.

That is, the farther the lower your line initial life expectancy, the more it falls.

Since just everybody is living longer and the lower it is your current and life expectancy, the more it will increase.

Okay, this is unconditional convergence in life expectancy, okay?

96% of the countries are seeing unconditional convergence in life expectancy.

And this is the way it looks by region of the world okay.

So typically the lowest one is always sub-Saharan Africa.

The light the light blue one by the way one is the United States.

So I'm every year one is the United States.

So this is all relative to United States. This is a measure of convergence okay.

So there's unconditional convergence in life expectancy unconditional convergence in life expectancy.

There is unconditional convergence in a fertility decline.

Everybody is having fewer children. This was initial fertility rates.

It relative to the US or US is zero high. It's the longer fertility rate.

So the US is zero. It's the log of one. So everybody here had a higher fertility rate than the US.

And they all have seen declines in fertility rates. And this is by by region okay.

So there's unconditional convergence in fertility rates.

Everybody in the world is having fewer children. Ehm in Chile has a fertility rate slightly below that of the US.

You're a very religious country, but you managed to make it compatible with your children.

Um, but the US is one, so everybody is having fertility rates very close to us and and they've been falling.

I don't know how to explain this stagnation here.

And in sub-Saharan Africa in general, you have unconditional convergence in fertility rates in 96% of all countries.

Okay. This is female labor force participation rates in 75% of countries.

There's unconditional convergence and female labor force participation.

So this is a global phenomenon. Women are working. Okay.

There's unconditional. And so this is a graph.

So you have the Middle East. And North Africa is typically the lowest female labor force participation rate followed by South Asia.

In Latin America is over here. It's it's the 87% of the US.

Many countries in Latin America are above the US in terms of female labor force participation rates.

And then it's happened in the last generation or two.

Okay. So there's unconditional convergence and female labor force participation rates.

As a consequence there's unconditional convergence in employment rates workers per capita.

Okay. There is. So workers per capita are being homogenized in 68% of the countries and two thirds of a country's.

And these are by region A.

So in South Asia we have uh, um, uh, you know, rates of employment that are similar to that of, of the US.

U.S. is at one, you know, Latin America is here.

You see a blend from 50% of the U.S. to 85% of the U.S. and this is unconditional convergence in urbanization.

It's happening in 72% of countries. You see everywhere.

Urbanization rates are rising relative to the U.S. it's not that they're rising in absolute terms, are rising faster than in the U.S.

Okay. So gaps in urbanization rates are falling.

Yeah, there's unconditional convergence and years of schooling.

So there is unconditional convergence in education. And you see everybody relative to us is catching up in years of schooling.

There's unconditional convergence in tertiary schooling.

Okay, so the gaps in tertiary education are in 91% of the countries are following.

They're not in Malawi, in Guatemala and Philippines.

And so this is a tertiary enrollment rates relative to us in Chile.

By the way. It's a little bit above the US in Argentina also.

So so those gaps have disappeared in some parts.

So unconditional convergence in tertiary education. So um.

Um we have I showed you a production function.

Right. Or an accounting thing. So everything is converging ergo.

What did I have on the left hand side of that equation. GDP per capita.

That's the reason why GDP per capita is also converging, right?

Wrong. It's only converging in a third of the countries.

It's in two thirds of the country. It's not converging. And this is sort of a GDP per capita worldwide.

This is the Middle East. This is South Asia.

This is it is Latin America. This one. No, no, this one is not.

This is East Asia. This is Latin America. So there's no convergence.

There is convergence in South Asia. So this but there's divergence in sub-Saharan Africa.

So the puzzle is going to be why the [INAUDIBLE] are we converging and everything.

And not in GDP per capita. Okay.

So we're converging here, here, here and here, here and here, here, here and here.

So ergo, it must be that we must be diverging here.

What was the question? Huh? What was the measure of capital in the convergence?

So I had capital output ratios, but I, I have them.

I'm going to show you a table where they are. But I missed the graph.

I missed the graph. And the reason why I missed the graph is now I understand is that that graph I have those

numbers from the pen world tables and pen world tables don't calculate regional averages.

So I would have had to create the region and so on.

But but it's also true that there's I show you there's convergence in capital per worker.

So there's no convergence in there's divergence in TFP.

There's only convergence in TFP in 25% of the country.

So three fourths of the countries are seeing widening in gaps in total factor productivity.

How do you measure the margin. Sorry. How do you measure technology.

So technology is measured as a residual and what they call the solo residual,

which means it's um you put in say capital per worker, you put human capital per worker.

And you know what happens to output per worker. So the residual is what makes the two compatible.

So all this doing to GDP doesn't go up.

It's because of technology that's like by definition no no no because it could be that you are losing human capital or you're using physical capital.

So it's that part which is not explained by human capital of that part which is not explained by physical capital.

So it's the residual of the gap. So you're seeing growing factors of production and not growing output.

It means that those factors of production must be becoming less productive.

So the residual of of these things and this is what's been happening to TFP.

There's no convergence here okay. So and this these are the numbers.

So A where is capital R.

Here is capital is C capital deepening has been converging in 9,296% of the country.

So there's massive convergence in capital. So there's convergence in capital.

There's convergence in human capital. There's convergence in workers per capita.

And there's no convergence in income per capita. So income per capita is here.

It's only in 37% of countries. The way you make that compatible is that you need to have divergence in the majority of countries, okay.

So good question is going to be why the [INAUDIBLE] do you see a so it must be that the problem is here, okay, whatever that technology is.

And next week, uh, we're going to start talking about what the [INAUDIBLE] is, you know,

we're going to be zooming into this technology and trying to figure out what it is.

But, um, I thought this, by the way, this finding in to me, it's relatively recent.

Um, um, I've come to see it this way for the last three years or so that I noticed that we are massively converging and everything,

and was triggered also by the book, by old or dead galore.

And the book is called, uh, I mean, his theory is called, uh, unified growth theory, right?

Where he is trying to endogenous the Malthusian equilibrium and the escape from the and equilibrium in a single framework.

And if you and these are the mechanisms that he talks about in the book.

Well, I would have expected that if those are the mechanisms that at the end of the story, uh, you know, there's convergence, right?

And that's not what we observe. So, so that that means that there's, uh, a more important story to be told about technology adoption,

technology diffusion, technology, something because all, all the hard parts are happening.

No. So, uh, you know, there's, uh, a big debate as to know what triggered the Malthusian, uh, the end of the Malthusian equilibrium.

Um, you know. There is, uh, there's a big, big literature on it.

Uh, there's one literature that emphasizes the role of the energy transition.

And when you go from human energy to mechanical energy, that was a big revolution in the 19th century.

Declines in infant mortality, maybe associated with a germ revolution in medicine,

allowed to prevent a lot of sources of disease that had more to do with public

health than with medical treatments like improvements in water systems and so on.

And what caused the increase in the demand for for human capital?

And, and, you know, is, is the world supplying the amount of human capital that the economy is demanding,

or did we just increase the supply of human capital, in spite of the fact that economies were not asking for it?

And consequently, you can pull on a string, but you cannot push on a string, or if, if,

if, um, if there's a big demand pull on human capital and you supply it, you get a bang.

If there is a big increase in the supply of human capital and the economy doesn't need it, you have these driving Uber.

Um, so, um, and, and there's, uh, interesting discussions on gender and other things.

So there's, there's a big literature there, but, but that is, that's for another day.

What I want to say simply is just there are the mechanisms of the escape from the Malthusian trap are observable in many dimensions.

Except in GDP per capita. Yeah. Just one question. You see the overview convergence table.

Yeah. There are actual sort of three four factors who are not converging more than 90%.

So still urbanization, female labor race participation, employment.

So my question is another reason. Could be I don't know if you have, uh, research this.

Is that not all factors contribute in the same proportion to the GDP per capita.

Maybe there are some factors that are more influential than others, or a combination of them that might be more inflation than others.

Well, some of them are just a little bit mechanical because typically in rural areas,

uh, there's more labor force participation because you just work at home.

And so when families move from rural urban areas to urban areas, there's typically a decline in participation rates.

And what happens here is that some poorer countries start with very high participation rates.

And that's why you don't see it here. Because you don't see the convergence because they started there.

Where is it? Uh. And.

Here or or the gap.

For example. The last. The last column. Right. The last column is sort of the gap between different percentiles.

Yeah. So the gap for example in tertiary relevant even though is 91%.

Apparently the convergence, the gap is huge is 4.1.

Yeah. The same thing in urbanization. Right. So I don't know those nuances might have a role.

Yeah. Yeah. If you do it for Latin America it's stark because a tertiary enrollment rates are very close to converging female labor force.

Participation rates in many countries are above starting with Colombia.

And uh, and there's no trend for reducing them.

Okay. So you know, every country is going to be different.

That's why you guys are going to be looking at your own country.

But I think this is a general flavor that is going to at least set us up to try to figure out something about the next few lectures of reports.

Could it also be cited, um, quality of education, because there's been gigantic increases in primary school enrollment,

but kids in larger classrooms aren't really learning anything coherent.

It appears it's not quality over quantity. So, yes.

Um, I mean, the problem with quality of education is that we tend to measure with Pisa scores and typically countries,

they take the PSA exam, they do poorly and they never take it again.

So we don't have time series, good time series.

But this would bound this would demand that you have to have not just that the quality of education is not is not improving.

It has to deteriorate faster than the quantity of education is rising and the quantity of education is rising a lot.

So if you want to tell our quality story, uh, you know, it has to be a really, really catastrophic deterioration of quality.

Pablo Andres, professor, I want to build on this question on how do we measure technology.

You mentioned you mentioned that technology innovation by EFP, right? I guess is a residual.

Exactly. Is there show that you are not able to measure after accounting by human capital and capital.

Right. So could it be like something else that is not technology that let's say institutions or something else?

Or are we going to say that everything that I explained like of labor capital will be technology?

And I'm going to say that technology and institutions are two words that should have been invented by diplomats,

because diplomats love words that have imprecise meaning so that they can all sign the communique again, and everybody interprets whatever they want.

Right? So I think that, um, a technology is imprecisely defined and institutions is even more imprecisely defined.

And so I, I'm going to argue that, uh, this, you know, Ludwig Wittgenstein argued that the problems in philosophy tend to be problems in language.

If you clean up the language, philosophical problems go away.

And next week I'm going to try to clean up the language as to what technology is and what institutions are.

But it reminds me to say the following.

People say, well, isn't this all explained by institutions?

And then I would say, in the same way as I said, okay,

but this constrains what you want to say about institutions in the same way as this constrains what you have to say about the quality of education,

because the quantity is growing a lot. What do you need to assume about the quality?

So here I'm going to make the same kind of argument with institutions.

You tell me that this is institutions. Fine. It's institutions, but it's institutions that are capable of extending life, capable of empowering women,

capable of urbanizing, capable of educating, capable of developing universal university system, but not GDP per capita.

So tell me a story of institutions that is compatible with those observables.

So why are institutions good for some things and not for others?

Okay. In general, I find I'm a little bit I'm.

A anyway Roy.

And then we go to that news. So two possible stories that comes to mind.

The first one is how did through this terrible idea the first ones like they don't do it not and it happens,

you know, because of globalization or something like that. And the second story is first mover advantage.

Like it doesn't matter where everything goes, who advance first.

He's going to advance in the future first. Okay, but but you wouldn't.

I can buy that. But you would need a mechanism for what is the source of the first mover advantage.

And what's a mechanism that. So you would need to explain something of a mechanism.

And and I can for example learning by doing might be that, you know the first one who starts learns more.

But if you learn more now you're competitive. If you're a competitive, then whoever comes next has to start learning.

But then they are uncompetitive when they start. And so they can't get into the market because you are already there.

So but then the story is something about learning, something about knowledge, something about how knowledge gets adopted.

So then in the end, it's a technological explanation. Maybe agglomeration is a market and process or something.

Agglomeration. Why? What is the economics of agglomeration? What gives rise to agglomeration economies?

What's this? So that might be a technology itself right.

So that's why I say I, I, I'm not going to satisfy you with an answer today, but maybe in two weeks time you'll be satisfied.

But once you once you try to tell a more complete story, you'll see that you need to make some assumptions of what?

What do you mean by technology? What would be the mechanism for this technology to have trouble being adopted, and so on?

Why would there be agglomeration economies? Why would there be a first mover advantage and so on?

Yes. And, um, I said a question about access to family planning and the role that plays with declining fertility rates.

Is it more just like you think that's the case, or is it also is like cultural shifts around access to the quality of this quantity aspect?

So curious about in the introduction of and access to family planning is what actually caused the shift in.

I mean, it's, uh, it's a good question. Uh, there's a literature out there and ehm, I once upon a time I tried to do regressions, uh,

trying to explain if it's the return to human capital, etc., not at the individual level, using labor for surveys.

Uh, and the only thing I can say is that the a, the right hand side variables explain very little of the variation.

So if you, if you run the regression, say, in 1990 and you use the changes in, in, in,

in the right hand side variables for by 2010 you explained very little of the decline in fertility.

So so there's something weird. So uh, time fixed effect.

Okay. But I don't I don't know I don't know what what what's behind that time fixed effect.

It could be, but, um, it could be that the availability of, um, of an A in, you know, in, in contraceptives and so on.

What I can tell you is that the and this goes back to the 19th, 18th century and so on.

And before that, the age of marriage is very much related to, to fertility,

and age of marriage has been increasing with women and going to university education.

And so the delay of marriage and so on is, is is somewhat related to that.

So it may not and may there may be other mechanisms.

It may be human capital itself or so uh, with it.

Um, if I'm not wrong, one other unconditional convergence we see is in manufacturing productivity.

Right? So is it true that the the TFP differences that explain the difference in GDP, uh, are all in no trade of.

Yeah, okay. Yeah, that's going to be an interesting puzzle.

I, I have it remind me to share a, a paper that I wrote last year on, uh, export led growth.

It has some stylized facts that are going to be interesting.

So let me I mean, I'll share it. Yeah.

If you are into something in your into something and I'll talk about it in future.

Mohammed. Uh, you are saying unconditional divergence?

Uh, sorry. Convergence in, uh, different aspects except GDP.

Um, uh, together. Not that good. Not yet.

There is also a school of thought conditioning for an audience.

So, for example, uh, it can be the geographical location of the country.

It can be a political, uh, uh, system like psychology.

So, uh, why don't we consider these factors?

So so we will talk about geography later in the class.

But in general, eh, there's this basic principle that says you cannot explain a change with a constant.

So geography is kind of fixed. So why.

So what is the mechanism through which you would explain a change in dynamics because of something that was there all along.

So it's going to constrain those possible explanations.

But we are going to actually marry geography and complexity.

In this lecture we're going to call it remoteness in, in uh in a few weeks.

So we are going in that direction trying to uncover.

So you'll have to have some interaction term between geography and something for it to matter.

Yes. When you. I'm meeting. Go ahead, go ahead.

Okay. Um, I'm just wondering if migration, the explanation of, uh, of the phenomenon that,

uh, technology has come up emerging, given that the brain during contact and, um,

also probably because I'm just saying maybe the Western market cannot offer enough, um,

jobs for people with high education, so they have to go to other countries to seek further opportunities.

But but in in your explanation, in your explanation, it's the lack of demand for human capital that is the, uh, effective mechanism.

And, and migration is just a consequence of the lack of demand for human capital.

But in the standard Model, you would say, if I'm offering more, supplying more human capital, it will be used.

And especially given that there's all this technology around, it will be complementary to that technology.

So. So in, um, I think in, in your explanation, before you get to migration, you have to assume something.

Um, what is, uh, divergence and which in different places.

Ehm. Okay. So so that would be there is ehm a there's inequality in, in wages across countries and,

and there's complementarity between technology and high skill.

So the high skilled people want to go to work. Technology is and so you have a dearth of high skilled people in the developing countries.

But this is measuring the supply in the developing countries before migration of people with tertiary education.

So in any case, migration is small relative to the massive increase in education.

So it's, you know, 1%, 2%, 1% the year or except in Venezuela, which we are special.

But the so I would say migration is going to play an important role.

But on the positive side, you know, in a couple of lectures, migration is going to be, ah,

play a role in technology diffusion because it's easier to move brains than it is to move knowledge into brains.

So migration is a way to speed off the movement of knowledge.

And we're going to talk about that in a future lecture.

Yes. Um, what about a model in which all of the profit from the adoption of new technologies accrues only to the first firms that adopt it?

So I'm thinking of a scenario in which a firm adopts a brand new tech, is able to drop its price, capture more of the market,

but it doesn't have to drop its price all the way down to the level at which the new tech saves its labor.

And in contrast, if ten firms adopted the new tech all at the same time, they would have to compete with each other,

so they would all have to drop their prices all the way down to rock bottom of what the new tech allowed.

But if only one firm does it, it has this window of time in which it can extract extra.

And then if all the profit goes there, then what you get is a situation in which everything else can converge.

But the profit has gone only to the ones that add up first. So that's a little bit the first mover advantage that Roy was talking about.

Uh, before um, again, that that has to have some mechanism.

And the I don't know how universal is that mechanism.

I mean, you have these these industries where you have.

Natural monopolies, say like Google searches or stuff like that.

The room where everybody wants to be, you know, everybody wants to be in Facebook because everybody is in Facebook group.

And so you have a winner take all markets.

But I don't know that that's the case for many other industries.

But I need to I need to move to two to what was supposed to be today's lecture.

But what happened out there? You have any longer I are wow.

Okay, okay, I have 30 minutes, so let me move.

ZIP, zip. Is it in through the lecture?

So, um, okay, so in the last half hour.

So now that we've discussed Mathewson economics and the escape from Malthus and,

and we've been disappointed, let's see how much of an answer we can get through standard growth theories.

So a I'm going to talk about the Solow model quickly.

Um, a and by the way,

it's very important when you have a model to think of the world through the model and then and look at the data of the world through the models.

Because, you know, one of the things we need to develop is this capacity to diagnose.

And we use theory in the process, but it's we use it slightly differently.

So you you approach a data theory and form that and then you infer.

So this these are the idea that Solow thought he was entering.

And this he was supposed to be answering what we call the calendar facts.

And the first calendar fact was that labor productivity was growing in the world at a fairly sustained rate.

You're thinking of something like 1 or 2% capital per worker had been growing.

The return to capital had been relatively stable.

The capital output ratio had remained relatively stable.

A Piketty says that capital is rising as a share of output.

But yeah, but the idea was that it was relatively stable in the capital.

Labor, capital and labor were capturing fairly stable shares of income.

So x percent was going to capital, X percent was going to labor relatively stable again, because he's going to say not quite,

but these stylized facts and they're very large differences in growth rates

across countries and and very large differences in income across countries.

So all of these are facts or stylized facts.

Some people say it's more style than fact. But, um, that the Solow model was trying to explain.

Okay. What's trying to explain? So, um, so what are the assumptions of a solo model?

First? The first assumption is you're going to think about an aggregate production function.

Okay. And the question is so you have firms here and their firms are using capital and labor.

Under what conditions can you describe that as an aggregate production function?

There's a whole set of assumptions that you need to make to be able to think of an aggregate production function,

but they're all thrown under the rug. That aggregate production function is going to have constant returns to scale,

meaning that if you increase all factors of production by a certain parameter, output would increase by the same parameter.

Okay, so if you put lambda times the stock of capital lambda times the stock of labor, you get lambda times the output.

You tell me no, but that's impossible because you run out of space or you run out of something.

Well, that means that you did not increase all the factors of production, that there was one factor of production that you did not increase by London.

That's why you don't observe increasing without some scale.

But in principle the function is going to have increasing returns.

That means that you should see decreasing returns for a fixed factor.

Okay. So for example if I'm measuring output per worker so it's per worker.

So if I add more and more capital per worker I should be observing declining returns.

Okay. Because and I'm going to assume perfect competition, profit maximization and so on.

Under those conditions, labor is going to be used to the point that the wage rate is equal to the marginal product of labor,

and capital is going to equal to the marginal product. The rate of return on capital is going to be equal to the marginal product of capital, right.

That's economic profits are zero okay.

And as a consequence I'm going to observe that output is going to be which is.

You know how much labor gets the wage rate times the amount of labor is the amount capital gets,

the rate of return on capital times the stock of capital that that is going to be determined by the model itself.

So this is the production function measured in terms of output per worker.

So it has to have this shape. Because of this as you increase the stock of capital this is little k capital per worker.

And this is output per worker. It should have this shape out of this.

There's going to be a savings function.

Part of the output is going to be used to increase the stock of capital for the next generation or for the next year.

And David Ricardo invented the idea that output was wheat.

And you can use wheat to eat, or you can use wheat as a seed.

So as a seed, it's like capital. It's used in the production.

And if you eat it, it's consumption.

So the amount of seeds you'll have next year depends on how much seeds you produce this year that you did not eat.

And that's your savings of seeds. Okay.

So let's assume that the savings rate is a simple function that's just uh, uh, a fraction of income.

So you you save a constant fraction of income.

And no savings has to equal investment.

Can anybody explain to me why savings equals investment? Is it savings?

It's also an investment. Without savings, you don't have it in us.

And so savings has to equal investment.

Can I ask you? Does it has to equal investment in over the course of what, a year or of course, or five years overnight, just like over our long term.

Over a long term. I say no.

So, I mean, I don't have too much time to elaborate, but let me start by saying.

Can you explain to me why income is equal to spending? Is income equal to spending?

To begin with, is income equal to spending? No. Over the long term.

Right. Over the long term, but not instantaneously.

Right. So this is I'm going to tell this to are you not paid.

Yes. Okay. So I'm going to tell this to two different differential.

Because I always tell him you have to spend more time talking about national accounts.

And we're going to talk about national accounts later in the course. But this is the simple intuition.

I'm going to say that income is equal to spending, period.

Why? Because in every transaction, what somebody calls income, the other one called spending.

It's double entry bookkeeping. Income is equal to spending because and I just add all the transactions.

This on this side of the transaction. Some people are making money on this side of the transaction.

Some people are spending money for all the transactions.

Income has to be equal to spending. So income is equal to spending instantaneously because of double entry bookkeeping.

It's just tautological. Tautology doesn't have any.

Now, if I tell you that some people earn more money than they spend.

And other people spend more money than they earn. What can you infer?

If you call what people earn more than they spend, let's call that savings.

And the people that spend more than they earn, let's call that irresponsibility.

No, no, let's call that investment. Then savings equals investment simply because income is equal to spending.

And whoever saved on one side has to be compensated the other side.

This is just double entry bookkeeping, double entry bookkeeping.

And um, but we have to have those intuitions more incorporated into our description of the world.

But that's why I think that that then it's useful to start macro with accounting so that people have the accounting connection.

You can tell me. Well, but what about the rest of the world?

Well, the rest of all I can say, okay, let me split the world into two things us and the rest of the world.

So income is equal to spending, including everybody.

So if my country has income above their spending, it must be that the rest of the world is spending more than their income relative to us.

So if my income is more than my spending, I should have a current account surplus, which is the relationship with the rest of the world.

So again, this is pure accounting. Pure accounting.

Okay. So yes, if there's an open economy then income is still equal to spending counting everybody, including the rest of the world.

But so so this is just accounting.

So that's why savings equals investment accounting.

Now for it to be an equilibrium and not people trying to change their savings behavior or their investment behavior,

there's probably a price that's going to keep it where it is or maybe the interest rate or something.

Okay. But savings equals investment capital is going to depreciate that.

The rate delta is sort of like machines are going to be dying.

And so delta of dying okay. And population growth at the rate n.

So if you ask yourself what's going to be happening to the stock of capital,

well, I'm going to be buying new machines at the rate of my savings s times y.

But some of the machines I had at the beginning have died, are dying at the rate delta, and there are more workers coming in.

So I before I can raise capital per worker, I have to give each new worker his stock of capital.

Okay, so this is the amount of machines I need to replenish the machines that die.

And this is the number of machines I need to equip the new workers.

Okay. So that's going to be my my next equation.

And my next equation is this line here which is just this straight line s y equals delta plus n times k okay.

And that's going to be uh, a line that goes through the origin array through the origin with a slope of delta plus n okay.

And the beautiful thing about this is that this has an equilibrium,

and the equilibrium is here, meaning that in the long run, the economy is going to get here.

If you are here. You're buying these machines, but you only need these machines to stay where you are.

So you have these excess machines, these excess machines here.

So the next period your stock of capital will be bigger until you get here.

And once you're here, if you are on this side, you're only buying these machines.

But you would need all of these machines to stay where you are. So here the stock of capital would be falling.

And that's why you go there. And there are some implications of this.

And the most important implication is that capital accumulation cannot be the secret of growth.

Capital accumulation cannot be the secret of growth okay.

Period. So capital accumulation is not the secret of growth because capital will generate these decreasing returns to a fixed factor.

So it could not possibly explain long run growth in incomes for capital.

And that insight I think, is worth the Nobel Prize. Okay.

And so we can ask this model.

The question is what happens if I change some of the parameters of the model.

What happens if I change the savings rate. Oh well, if I increase the savings rate, I'm going to now have more machines than I had before.

It will allow me to see if this was the equilibrium.

Now I can buy all of these machines that will allow me to increase the stock of capital, but it will only get me to a higher level of income.

But it won't explain long run growth just would explain the higher level of income.

So savings rates go with the level of income, but now not with a growth rate, not with the long run growth rate.

What happens if I increase population? Well, if I increase sorry, if I increase population I just make this curve,

this this rate steeper population growth will increase the rate of population growth.

So what that means is that now I'm going to need more of my savings, are going to go to equip the new workers because I have more workers coming in.

And as a consequence, in equilibrium, I'm going to be poorer, okay.

I'm going to have lower income per capita because I have lower machines per capita,

because given my savings rate, I need more of those machines and to hold the workers.

Okay, so a how does a solo say about rich countries and poor countries, maybe rich countries,

poor countries are poor because they save less or because they have faster population growth.

Okay, so I would be a, you know,

a moral theory of income of of the wealth of nations that countries are poor because they are profligate and irresponsible.

So this is the relationship between savings rates and income per capita.

A you don't observe much.

This is so at the same savings rate. You have Congo and Luxembourg or Ghana and the United States.

So the difference between the U.S. and other parts is not observable in the savings rate.

So that part doesn't seem to explain much.

Okay. And this is, uh, this is, uh, income per capita and population growth.

So countries with higher rates of population growth tend to be poorer.

But these are two orders of magnitude. And this is, you know, differences of 1 or 2%.

If you plug it into the model,

you'll never get two orders of magnitude difference of income per capita because of 1 or 2% difference in population growth.

So these these differences cannot be explained by by population growth.

And in addition. So this is an annual rate of population growth and annual rates of GDP.

Growth in the R-square is really, really low.

So it's not that countries that AME and, you know, GDP per capita growth is uh, is, uh, you know,

Guyana and Libya or Bangladesh and Australia are more or less at the same rates of population growth.

Would radically different growth in GDP per capita. So, yeah.

Would you change if you use lagged model. Check the population growth in GDP 20 years later.

No. Because this is this is long term. This is uh, over 20 years or this is what, 12 to 21.

It's like a decade. Nine years okay. Another possibility is that the shape of the savings curve is a little bit like this.

Instead of being like the one I had before.

So if this is the case, this is a model that's going to have two equilibria.

One is going to be here and one is going to be here.

Right. And this is what they call poverty traps. So you might be able to tell some story about poverty traps.

But if poverty traps was the story then obviously the recommendation would be that the world Bank come in, give them savings to get up to here.

And once they are there, they converge. Right. So it would have the implication if you help them for a while, they'll grow out of it.

And. So, um, now in the poorer countries, grow faster.

So one of the one of the implications of, um, of the solo model is that the farther you are from equilibrium, the faster you grow.

That's the unconditional convergence. Okay.

And is there unconditional convergence in the world? And the answer is no.

The R-square is 0.06. There's very little variation that can be explained by by your initial level of income.

So that means that this simple model we have up to now is incomplete.

At least it doesn't have what it takes. In addition, um, if the USA is 70 times richer than Sierra Leone,

if you plug it into this equation that just has income per capita as a function of capital,

capital per capita, or income per worker as a function of capital per worker.

And if you say, okay, U.S. is 70 times richer than Sierra Leone, that means that this variable is 70 times richer.

It means that what should the capital stock in the US be relative to the capital stock in Sierra Leone?

If you assume that this alpha is 0.3, then the capital stock should be 1.4 million times bigger than in Sierra Leone.

And we don't observe that. You don't observe these differences in capital stock.

In addition, if you calculate the rates of returns to capital in Sierra Leone,

vis-a-vis the rates of return to capital in the US compatible with difference of 70 to 1,

and the returns to capital in Sierra Leone should be 20,000 times higher than in the U.S.

Okay, so you should go invest there.

So it means that there's so little capital there that the returns to capital are huge, right?

But what we observe is the opposite, that capital flows to rich countries.

It doesn't flow to poor countries. And this is with a lot of data.

So, um, we don't observe, um, the capital is being sucked into places because it's so scarce.

Okay. So all of this means that there's something missing in this model.

You might say, oh, maybe it's human capital. And with human capital, you get essentially the same model.

It doesn't explain long term growth. So it's not the accumulation of physical capital and it's not the accumulation of human capital.

Okay doesn't explain long term growth.

So now I'm going to because I'm have trouble fitting the model to the data because I am going to invent something else.

I'm going to add a parameter to the data. The parameter to the data I'm going to add is this a okay.

What is a. I'm going to show you an equation that makes a very precise.

So if this is output total output if you divide by L.

So now it's output per worker. You have this little k which is capital per worker and h is human capital per worker.

And so in this model the only reason the only way you can have long term growth is if a growth.

So growth the system can grow. If a growth and the rate of growth of the economy in the long run is going to be the rate of growth of a.

So said differently. I need to assume that something makes the economy grow, and that something explains the rate of growth of the economy.

Except that I don't have a clue what it is. I know what it is, not what it is not is what I'm counting, but what it is, I don't know.

Okay. Okay. So.

Okay. So now I can ask myself the question, why is Sierra Leone?

Why is the U.S. 70 times richer than Sierra Leone? I can measure how much is that?

How much? How big is the difference in capital?

I can measure how big is the difference in human capital or whatever, and I can measure how much I need to assume that the A's are different.

And what you'll find is that. So this is the composition by this guy.

Chuck, what's your name and what's this paper coming from?

Chuck Jones. Huh? Chuck Jones. Jones, this is Harlan Jones.

Okay, so so this is what they call income accounting or development accounting.

You see, this is the difference in output per worker. This is the difference in capital deepening.

This is the difference in human capital. And this is the difference in age.

So these are all rich countries. They all have very A's very close to one us is one.

If you go to poor countries you need to assume very large differences in age.

Okay. So saying Guyana or China and China was at 6 in 1988, 6% of the U.S. it was at 90% capital deepening.

It was a 60% human capital has only 10% TFP.

So the bulk of the explanation of why countries are rich and why countries are poor is kind of India.

That's another way of saying it's all in the eight. Okay, in in addition, we can if this is the production function I can take logs to that.

So this is log of why is log of a plus log of k.

I can think first difference is. So the difference in log is the growth rate.

The difference in log of A is the rate of growth of productivity.

And the difference in this is the difference in capital stock. So I can decompose a a growth in terms of how much of it was factor accumulation

and how much was it was total factor productivity and growth accounting has been,

you know, a staple of the of the practice.

And I find it a passionately useless or, or not very informative because if you realize k a, the amount of capital you want is a function of A,

the bigger the A, the more capital you want, and the bigger the A, the more human capital you want.

So when you say, oh, this is explained by the amount of the increase in the stock of capital,

this is explained by the increase in the stock of human capital. Well, but those in the cells, why did they increase.

They increased because they were in demand. If they were in demand, what caused that demand.

And a is part of that demand function okay.

So that's why I'm not super am super enthusiastic about their growth accounting decompositions, but they typically end up saying the problem is TFP.

The problem is different. And so this is my main equation for DFP.

Okay. Yeah. So it's all in the area. It's okay.

So then we're going to need. So physical capital and human capital cannot explain long term growth.

To explain sustain growth you need to assume that productivity increases over time for some reason okay.

And to explain why some countries are rich and other countries are poor,

you have to assume that they have different A's, otherwise you cannot fit the data.

You need to assume that there are different A's. So everything in here is in the story of the A's.

What the [INAUDIBLE] is India? Yes. What you got? If Douglas is not the solution, am I talking about.

Well, it's not a function of Douglas.

It's a function of constant returns to scale technologies.

So any production function with its constant elasticity of substitution.

But in general, if it is, uh, constant returns to scale technology, it will this will happen.

Thank you. Um. So by the way, it explains the shares of labor and capital,

because the parameter alpha of the production function is going to regulate how much goes to capital and how much goes to labor.

And the model does not tell us where the growth rate comes from.

Okay. So um, the endogenous. So this led to a literature on so-called endogenous growth theories that I won't have too much time to to explain.

Um, but in, um, those endogenous growth theories are going to say there must be something that causes increasing returns to scale.

And if there were, if I'm assuming increasing returns to scale,

then maybe I don't have declining returns to scale to a fixed factor, declining returns to a fixed factor.

So instead of having this curve B like this, now I might have this curve be straight.

So this is among they say this is the amount I need to replenish.

I add stock of capital. Now that I don't have this now I am home free.

So the question is what could possibly be the source of increasing returns?

And one. One way to aim to explain increasing returns is that the increasing returns are coming from ideas.

Okay. And the ideas. So I'm going to add to the production function.

This I for ideas. And it's going to have constant returns to scale on capital, human capital and labor.

For a constant set of ideas. So it'll be constant returns to scale for k, L, and h.

But if you increase by lambda everything close and I and ideas now you would have increasing returns.

Okay, so it's constant returns in k elements but increasing returns and k lh and I.

But these ideas are going to be some kind of public got some kind of externality.

So people are not going to be internalizing it. It's going to be something in the water.

And let's assume that the ideas are proportional to population.

So if the ideas are proportional to population, say this ideas to a gamma lambda times ideas to the gamma.

Now I'm going to have increasing returns.

And if I have more population, the bigger the population, the bigger the output.

Because now the bigger the population, the more ideas are going to be appearing, the more ideas I'm going to be appearing faster growth rate.

Okay. So this is going to generate something like these agglomeration economies if you want.

Or this might explain why in technology, um, growth has been accelerating over time in the world because world population has been rising.

And the and so there's just more people that can come up with ideas in the world.

And this, this is going to generate them generate that.

So this this might be not associated with this.

Now that you have more people, more people means more ideas. More ideas means means more production.

So instead of having more people, less output, you have more people, more output okay.

And that that that might be something about what's underpinning this, this sustained growth.

But it has to somehow involve increasing returns but increasing returns that have to be external to the firm.

Because if these increasing returns were internal to the firm, the world would be just one huge company, right?

Everything would be happening inside the firm. We have gazillion firms in.

