[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
So next. Year after that, I'm old enough.

That I've got some fat.

So. I want you to go away for a while.

Sure. Yeah, I think so.

I think I was ready for a bit of a school, and, you know, I knew, you know.

Yeah, right. I mean, I think.

I mean. How do you say, you know?

I don't know. I don't know.

I think it's great. Um, yeah.

It's like. Okay. And it's not it's not going to change things.

My children. That's.

All right. It's okay.

All right. Do we have some announcements and.

Next slide. Okay. So you completed problem set one.

Was it too painful? Painful.

Maybe we should make it more painful. Problem set two.

Uh. Um. This is the longest and hardest one, so start early due October 7th.

Uh, avail yourself of office hours. You have Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

Office hours. And we have some hints during this weeks and next weeks review sessions.

Hints for how to solve the problem. Okay.

So, uh, starting on Thursday, we'll keep our seats, uh, the same so that we can use peach Lee and so on.

And, uh, please join the slack. The class slack.

There's a slack channel, and we'll try to post helpful hints, etc. on that.

And when it's September 26th, it's next week.

Next week on Wednesday I think. Okay.

Very good. So come to the gross out, um, office hours.

So you know what this moniker stands for. And.

So what have we learned from growth theory last week?

Eh, the first thing we learned is that sustain a growth is not explained by asset accumulation but by technological progress.

Okay. Um, and to explain differences in income per capita between countries, we cannot do it by looking at the differences in asset endowments.

And you can only you have to introduce the idea that they have different A's,

that if you have different technologies that for some reason, assets don't have the same productivity in different places.

Now we saw this theory by, um, Paul Romer that, um, you know, you have to assume for to explain growth,

you have to assume that something is uh, more than, uh, something has increasing returns to scale.

Okay. Now, how can you generate a model with increasing returns to scale that does not generate natural monopolies?

And so his trick of doing that is to say, the reason why you can generate these increasing returns to scale is that the

increasing return is happening on a factor that it has public good characteristics,

probably good characteristics, in the sense that there's no rivalry in consumption.

Like, you know, if you if you know the Pythagoras theorem, um, it doesn't.

Track me from knowing the Pythagoras theorem in a way that if you drink this glass of orange juice, I cannot drink that glass of orange juice.

So there's rivalry and consumption. There's no rivalry in consumption, and it's very hard to exclude people from it, from consuming it.

That's fair. It's very hard to prevent people from learning about the Pythagoras theorem.

So he calls that ideas. He says that these ideas are non rivalrous and not excludable.

And this is going to be a problem for markets because the markets fail when there are these kinds of externalities.

So the problem in those models is that ideas are easy to copy and but hard to come up with.

So it's hard for rich countries to make progress because they have to come up with new ideas.

But it's easy for poor countries to catch up because they only have to copy ideas.

Okay. And so that should make progress at the technological frontier.

Hard. But it's gonna make catch up easy.

So then the question is why do we observe these large differences in technology between countries?

And the only thing they need to do is they need to imitate or just use the idea.

Okay. And I think that when when they get to that point, even Paul Romer,

they come with something out of a hat come with a those ex machina or a rabbit out of the hat,

you know, character that you introduce late in the game.

And that character is something called institutions. Okay.

And and maybe people don't copy the idea because they don't have the incentives to copy those ideas,

and they don't have the incentives to copy those ideas because institutions don't give them the incentives.

But but where the [INAUDIBLE] was institutions up to now was not in the model.

It was not something that so suddenly it's it's something introduced late in the game where we don't know exactly what role they play.

Okay. I'm going to argue that technology does not diffuse because of the nature of technology itself,

and that unless we have a more sophisticated theory of technology, we will never understand the problem with technology diffusion.

Okay, so so what I'm going to do is I'm going to give you an alternative theory of technology, if you want, or a more developed theory of technology.

And then we will see why in that theory, you know, diffusion might be problematic.

And what is the nature of the problems. But to tell you the truth, I, I have become disenchanted with the idea of decomposing society into capital,

labor, human capital and these factors of production. Okay.

And if you're trained as an economist, that's the natural way you see the world.

And you think that got the you know, it's just very simple way to go.

It's just the right way to parse reality. Okay.

So I'm going to clean the palate a little bit by destroying trying to destroy a little bit of these concepts.

So I want you to tell me what is capital.

I'm patient. Yeah. Silence gets negative scores.

Hmm, I will undress. I'm thinking on my.

I mean, it's something that you invest that I will bring out in the future.

So. Machines. Yeah. Okay. So what kind of machines?

Like, uh, a machine that would allow, like, a factory to produce, uh, such a product.

Uh huh. So how do we, um, how do we measure that machine?

I would measure it by the, let's say, the money it costs for the money it costs.

So it's a quantity of machines times their price. We're going to measure it in money.

And, um. And so how many types of capital are there?

Uh, um, probably a lot of different types.

We have different types of machines. Oh, yeah. And a lot of other type of capital as well.

What do we call capital markets? What are our capital markets?

These markets or machines or. Yeah, they run on funds.

Huh? Funds that are available to be invested in different endeavors.

Uh huh. So. So it's money. Yeah. So is it money or machines when it's something that you can use in order to achieve something else?

Um. And money can with money you can buy machines.

Um, in that way you can do something with money, you can create some factory or create new technology or stuff like that.

Okay. So the capital is the money or the capital. I think that's true.

I mean, it's it's different things because like when economies measure capital, we measure,

uh, equipment, investment equipment and, um, machinery investment, um, construction works.

Uh, uh, fixed gross fixed capital investment.

Right. Uh, uh, when we analyze financial markets, we have is, uh, how to finance the things which instruct the capital markets.

Uh, uh, these funds market for available money to be invested in something.

Okay. So. Ehm, so you would say that an airport is part of the capital stock?

Yes. And the train station. Huh? Also in an office building?

Yes. Okay. So what you're going to do?

You're going to add the price of the airport, and you are going to add the price of the train station,

and you're going to add the price of this office. And that's your capital stock.

So it's a one dimensional object. Is it a one dimensional object? Is it a high dimensional object?

What kind of an object is it? And so when you say, I'm going to substitute capital for labor,

and then I'm going to substitute an airport, or is it any substitute in the train station?

What is it that I'm substituting? Or you know, when you put it in the production function, what is it?

What is the aggregate stock of capital?

So in let me quote John Robinson, she has this funny quote says the production function has been a powerful instrument of miseducation.

And a student of economic theory, is taught to write y equals f of l k, where l is the quantity of labor.

K is the quantity of capital and y a rate of output of commodities.

He's instructed to assume all workers alike and measure L in man hours of labor.

He is told something about the index number problem involved in choosing a unit of output.

And then he's hurried on to the next question, in the hope that he will forget to ask in what units K is measured before ever.

He does ask. He has become a professor, and so sloppy habits of thought are handed down from one generation to the next.

So what she's going to say is no, you said that you are going to you measure labor in units of labor.

You should measure capital in units of capital,

and then capital and labor and the returns to labor and the returns to capital going to determine the price.

So you need a unit of capital to define the price, but you are using prices to define the units of capital.

You can't you can't come up what the price is if you don't tell me what art is, and you don't know what art is until you tell me what capital is.

So that was the capital, the Cambridge capital controversy between John Robinson and Beatrice Rothman, Cambridge and Paul Samuelson.

And and there's Bob Solow in in this Cambridge at MIT.

So anyway, so. The the point I want to make is very simple.

The point is that in. Everything.

My definition of capital, capital is something you produced in the past that you did not consume in the past.

And that can be used for production in the present. So it's some inherited stock of stuff that came from the past.

Okay. You inherited an airport you inherited or a train station you inherited an office building.

You inherited those things? Yes. Um, I'm so glad I can finally ask this question, but, um, why don't we.

Why don't we account for, like, how far off the tech frontier things are?

Like, if you have if you have, um, uh, textile making machinery that was built in 1920s,

do you still count that in your capital stock based on, you know, or does it get discounted appropriately as being less efficient?

That's a measurement problem. If you want, it would be on how you how much you depreciate your capital stock.

And what do you think by depreciation. That's more a measurement problem.

I'm staying here just at the conceptual problem. What it is I want to say capital is something was produced in the past.

So it's not current production but it can come into current production.

So it doesn't have to be a machine. It can be a you know seeds.

In accounting they call it circulating capital and as opposed to fixed capital.

Right. But it's it's something that was produced in the past comes into production in the present.

What was produced in the past. Well, all sorts of different things.

So you inherited a stock. Once you inherit that stock, that stock has a very low rate of substitution.

You know, it's very hard to make an airport into a train station or a train station into an airport.

Right. Now what we are going to assume, and this is typically in one of the footnotes of microeconomics,

it says, let's assume that you have complete markets.

And if you have complete markets, then there is going to be a market for anything that you might ever need because markets are complete.

And if markets are okay and then balance, then the price is a good reflection of the opportunity cost of everything.

So a company can only need money because with money it can buy anything it needs because markets are complete.

But if markets are not complete and, you know, complete markets in courtroom, I call it a arrow.

The abroad is not only markets for things today but markets today for things tomorrow and markets today for things tomorrow.

If it rains in markets today for things tomorrow if it's dry.

Right. So all of these contingent markets and so on.

So if markets are complete then if you are running a company you can do anything with money because there are markets for anything you might want.

In that case, then you know you can collapse capital into just a single dimensional variable.

Give me money, I'll make anything. If I have something that I don't like.

There are complete markets. I sell it and I can transform it into something I want.

If markets are not complete, then this possibility of transforming part of the history into one variable,

into one dimensional variable disappears, and you have to take the concreteness of whatever it is that you inherited.

And I would put it to you that you have a theory of development that starts with the assumption of complete markets.

It's a little bit problematic because in some sense development is about completing markets.

It's you know, you start from making.

I don't know in Mexico, corn and beans and not much else to making cars and televisions and a lot of other stuff.

So capital is a problematic variable.

Okay. So. So, um.

So in some sense, if you want to have. An improved equation, you would have a bunch of KS and a bunch of ages and.

No. And a bunch of L's. You have a high dimensional object, which is the bequest of the past.

And obviously the things that you can produce today has something to do with what the past bequeathed you.

But what is it that the past bequeathed you? It's not just a one dimensional scalar.

It's a more complicated object. Okay. So, um.

We know that one of the problems we need to answer is, why the [INAUDIBLE] do we see these huge differences in income per capita across the world?

We know that when Adam Smith wrote The Wealth of Nations, the richest country in the world was the Netherlands,

and it was about four times richer than the poorest countries in the world.

Today, the poorest country is Malawi. You multiply by four.

Malawi, which was the difference between incomes between the richest and the poorest.

Back went from Malawi. You get to Haiti. That was the gap that caught.

Adam Smith, his attention. Haiti is by far the poorest country in Latin America.

You multiply by four. Haiti, you get to Morocco, you multiply by four.

Morocco, you get to Poland. You want to apply for Poland.

You get to Singapore. So we know what happened.

What happened is that we were in this, you know, my in equilibrium forever.

And then we escaped that Malthusian equilibrium. So when we look at the world now, we have these huge differences in income.

We want to know where the [INAUDIBLE]. How the [INAUDIBLE] were these huge differences in income accumulated?

And here we have a story that says that the story is institutions, right?

Some people have extractive institutions. Some people have inclusive institutions.

And this book starts with the case of the two Nogales.

Nogales, Arizona, and Nogales, Sonora. Um, and they're separated by the Rio Grande and Rio Grande there.

Um, and so. Well, you know, one is rich, one is poor. What could possibly be the difference?

It has to be institutional. That's chapter one.

But it didn't tell you that if you look within Mexico, you can go to Guerrero, which has a deeper activity per worker similar to that of Honduras.

If you multiply it by two Guerrero, you get to Sinaloa. And that difference is bigger than the difference between the two.

Nogales. But if you multiply by two Sinaloa, you get to one cuatro.

And if you multiply by two Guanajuato, you get 2 million. All within Mexico.

So that means that there's at least a lot of variance to be explained.

That cannot be explained by, you know, by at least national level institutions,

because these places share the same federal law, the same judicial system,

the same political representation system, the same exchange rate, the same interest rate,

the same macroeconomic variables, the same financial architecture.

So I'm going to say that if you try to explain it by decomposing the world into these things where you have a very precise definition of capital,

labor and human capital, capital is is what we said.

It's just the value of the inheritance of the past measured in, in, in dollars.

If you want a single currency or a single variable, labor is measured in man hours or whatever, and human capital is measured in years of schooling.

If that's your division of the world, then all the explanation is in everything else.

But maybe the problem is that this way of decomposing the world is not particularly helpful,

because it only implies that whatever was not in the decomposition is is where the interesting stuff is.

It's all in the a okay, but maybe that's because of the way we decompose it.

So I like to think that this is a very classical way, saying that the world that these are the fundamental substances of the world.

Okay. And I'm going to argue that maybe the world is not composed of these things, but the world is is composed of these things.

Okay. So at the core, you say there are no five essences.

There's more essences. Okay. But you might say, so what?

Well, the so what comes in the fact that these essences,

these atoms combine and give rise to things that are not in the atoms, for example, they combine into molecules, right?

And the properties of the molecules are not the properties of the atoms.

Right. And they combine into macromolecules maybe like DNA or proteins or stuff.

Right. And when you combine them even more then you get, you know, cells and things like that.

And when you combine them even more, you get into, you know, cute animals like this one, or more social animals like this one.

And you eventually, if you combine them more, you end up with things like this.

So the idea is that the ingredients combine in ways that cause stuff to emerge.

That is not the property of the ingredients. Okay.

So chemistry arises from the physics of atoms, but it's kind of like a different thing.

And biology arises from the interaction of chemistry.

But it's kind of like a different thing. And life becomes, you know, you know, it's biology, but it becomes a different thing and so on.

Okay. And I would put it to you that in order to make sense of the world, we it's not that we need to go down to the foundational things.

We need to understand the chemistry or we need to understand the biology of interaction.

And that's why I think that this idea of decomposing it in just these substances and how they aggregate hides a lot of what the action is.

Okay, so what is technology?

I'm going to argue that technology is productive knowledge because in the world, humans don't live by taking nature as it is.

Humans have to transform nature to their liking.

And to transform. Because for a fundamental theorem, there's a theorem that says that there is no such thing as a hamburger tree.

If there were hamburger trees. What unfortunate. Absolutely.

If there were hamburger trees, it would be great, right?

But there are no hamburger trees. You want a hamburger? There is a long process of transforming nature that gets you to hamburger.

What is it that you have to do to get a hamburger? Well, first you have to domesticate plants like wheat.

You have to domesticate animals like cows. You have to figure out ways to ferment milk to make the cheese in the hamburger.

You need to, I don't know, domesticate tomatoes if you want to put it on top of it.

And then you need to figure out ways in which you cook things.

And what do you cook things in? You put it in a skillet.

You put it in a banana leaf. You know what? What do you use for cooking?

What you use for fire, what use, etc.? So we use a [INAUDIBLE] of a lot of processes to transform nature.

And the nature we transform is not just the physical nature. We transform also our social natures.

Right? So, you know, when you go watch a movie, right, then you go see a stand up comedian or, you know,

these are these are things that are not necessarily transformations of natural reality, but our social reality.

Yes. Roy, sorry if you seen the YouTube video that showed the one man trying to make his own sandwich from seeds and everything,

which cost him like $5,000 or something. Uh, just try to find it and say, yeah, yeah, I've seen the stuff.

People trying to smell copper or or things like that, you know?

It's amazing. You know, one way for you to think about, uh, about productivity is to ask yourself, precisely how long would it take you?

How long would it take you to do something like, you know, there's a box of of tools and it's amazing these boxes of tools have.

Gazillion tools of all sizes and and in and screwdrivers and it costs like I

don't know $25 you know at the minimum and the Massachusetts minimum wage.

That's two hours. You know, you don't get by the way.

You have to.

Mine the minerals and smelt them, some of them and tomatoes and and they do that in what you would two hours of your labor at the minimum wage.

It's impossible. So anyway, so there's a lot of knowledge that is being mobilized.

But this knowledge, it's kind of like hard to store.

A even when you do long division, how do you do long division?

So if you're going to divide 347 divided by 22.

Well, you say one and then here I get 12 and 127.

And this is like, is it six? Maybe not. So it's five, right.

And. And so ten seven and a oh no, they won't say 17.

No. Why do I need the chalk and the board?

Why do I need the chalk in the board? Welcome to, uh, is your short term memory, huh?

I would venture to say it's a short term memory. Exactly.

Because I cannot keep too many things in mind. So I need to store that.

That not that knowledge somewhere. Right? So I'm expanding the storage of my memory.

So when you read, for example, um, uh, uh, a recipe book or cooking book, it says.

I don't know if you make a squash soup by some squash a by some, I don't know, uh, uh, cream by some, salt by some, etc.

It put it in, uh, pot heated to whatever makes it.

It doesn't tell you how to make the squash. It doesn't tell you how to make the salt.

It doesn't tell you how to make the skill. It doesn't tell you how to make energy.

It presumes that that's kind of like in a previous step.

Somebody else somewhere else is. There's a manual to do that.

It just gives you, given these things, that I'm not going to tell you how to make them, and I'm going to tell you how to go from there to the soup.

Right. So that means that there's a lot of knowledge that is stored in the things that are going to use to produce,

and that knowledge is what we are going to call embodied knowledge.

So a tool embodies the knowledge of how it is made.

Right. So you don't need to know how to make the tool to use the tool right.

In the same way, I don't need to know, you know, what was my residual there.

It's on the board. So. Right okay. So embodied knowledge.

So tools and materials embody the knowledge that made them okay.

So that's embodied knowledge. There's another form of knowledge which is codified knowledge.

And codified knowledge is codes recipes formulas algorithms.

How to do manuals okay. Here a the knowledge exists in some conceptual space.

Here it exists in ink over paper, but the knowledge is not in the ink and it's not in the paper.

Right. You actually, I'm not showing you ink over paper.

I'm showing you a picture of ink over paper. But the picture has the same meaning as the original because it's not in the thing.

It's in some symbolic space. Okay. We call that codified knowledge, okay?

And a lot of what scientists are supposed to do is to transform, you know, regularities in the world into some kind of codified, simplified knowledge.

And that was physical laws are about and so on. Okay.

Now then there is a third thing, and you would know what that third thing is.

If you ask yourself the question, what would you do if your tooth hurts? And you'd say, oh, very simple.

I would get some tools and then I would follow some protocols and follow the instructions.

But you don't do that, right. You go to a dentist. The dentist uses tools, the dentist follows protocols.

But the thing dentist mixes the tools and the protocols with something you and I don't have,

which is the ability to see into the mouth and see things that would not have called our attention,

and use those tools in ways that we wouldn't know how to use them.

And that thing is something we call tacit knowledge or know how.

And that thing resides in brains and only in brains.

It doesn't reside in any other instantiation.

Okay? Now tools can be shipped around.

And in a lot of economics, especially in the 80s and 90s and maybe in the not you felt technologies all embodied in machines.

If you want countries to access technology, they should have free trade.

If you just, you know and you know, a permit free trade technology would be coming in.

But these countries don't. They put all of these trade barriers.

And as a consequence, they lose access to technology because technologies embody them and tools.

But if that were the case, I'm sure that some Mpd's would create an NGO to send machines to Malawi and then we would be home free.

And if that doesn't solve the problem, um, then other group of uh MPs, uh,

would start another NGO to put all their knowledge on the web and make it accessible to everybody.

Maybe they create Wikipedia or something, right.

And that way, that way, the Malawi, if they have a cell phone, Malawi would also have access to all the codes and the world would be flat.

But. Um, unfortunately, um, what's the name of this guy?

Because of us? Yeah, I got a couple of Alcatel, and I, uh, I got off Alcatraz.

So this guy, he. Apparently they tell me that he knows how to play tennis.

But a conversation with Alcaraz is not going to improve your tennis game.

Okay, so it's not something that moves from brain to brain easily.

Like if I asked you, you know, when did Christopher Columbus discover America?

You can tell me. And now I know, right? This is no.

Tell me how to play tennis. Okay. This is a secret. It doesn't work that way.

Malcolm Gladwell, it says it takes 10,000 hours to become good at something.

And 10,000 hours and 40 hours a week is about five years.

Okay, but the problem of the world.

So. So there's no how is something that resides in brains and only in brains.

It does not involve understanding. It's not that the guy, when he's playing, he he understands what it is that he does with his body.

Right? He he he knows what he's doing. It's not conscious.

A Michael Polanyi, who's actually an interesting factoid of history is a brother of Karl Polanyi.

I don't know if they had some of you read called Polanyi The Great Transformation.

Ever heard of that book? You should read it. It's a history of the 19th century.

Um, but he was a physical chemist, and late in his life,

he got into a debate with him of the philosophy of science with Karl Popper

and Karl Popper was the idea that he wrote a book called Objective Knowledge.

And his idea was that knowledge is something that exists out there kind of in society.

And a it evolves. So a theory makes predictions.

Those predictions can be falsified. So the theory can be shown to be lacking.

And so it evolves to account for these falsifications.

And so it's this evolving idea of an objective knowledge out there.

And his idea was no, no that doesn't resound like my life as a scientist.

My life as a scientist.

I have a lot of personal knowledge and personal knowledge and know how to do things, but I don't know even how to express that.

And so his idea was that, you know, more than you can say.

The tacit knowledge is typically things you cannot say because it's not codified.

It's not even codified. So if it were codified, it would be much more easy to transmit.

And that's why Alcazar cannot transmit what it is that he knows.

It's you know, it's a lot of muscle memory and and other things.

It is acquired through repetition and imitation. A long process of learning by doing it is what the.

What's his name? Um, okay. Uh huh.

Kahneman would have called system one, not system two. Okay.

Good. Now, the problem with technology is that this this knowledge is that it's not individual knowledge that matters.

You might say in some language that this lady knows how to implement that technology, but to implement this technology,

you need all these other people who know about different things and they all together can implement the technology, but none of them individually can.

So collective knowledge is the competence to do things that can only be done by teams.

Okay. Now here you're going to go quickly into this idea of measuring know how we want to measure this unit.

And one way to do it is to compare the UN imaginary in with from northern Canada here engaged in food production.

And here the Inuit engage in housing construction. And here the in with engage in the transportation industry to modern man.

And the question is who has more knowhow? And the idea is that.

What? And so we're typically that means that you're trying to measure things that are not in the same units.

Right. This guy uses glasses, headphones, shirts, watch computer screens, software.

He doesn't know how to make any of that. You put this guy here?

Right? He dies. We are sure that he. We don't know if [INAUDIBLE] starve to death.

If you'll freeze to death. But he's not going to survive.

So there's no practical sense in which you can say that this guy has more knowhow than this guy.

But you can say that this guy belongs to a society that knows how to make many more things than these guys.

Right. In this society. Everybody knows how to hunt.

Everybody knows how to fish. Everybody knows how to make an igloo. Everybody knows how to make a dog sled.

Men have, you know, a copy of of the of much of the technology of their societies.

Women have a copy over much of the other part of the technology of their society.

In those societies, women know how to make coats, how to make, you know, from from hides and so on.

And so. You can say that.

The society to which this guy belongs. Well, they know how to make sure it's glasses, computer screens, no watches.

They know how to make all of the thing. He doesn't. The society does.

So the punchline of of this discussion is that society is no more.

Not because individuals know more or not essentially because individuals know more, but because individuals know different.

The whole knows more because individuals know different. Okay.

So it's not an intensive measure of, you know, average years of schooling of the labor force.

That's an intensive measure. That's an average of something. It's an extensive measure.

It's how different are the bits of knowledge that everybody has.

Okay. And that's why intensive measures of human capital tend not to perform very well,

which are the ones that I've been showing to you in this course all along.

Now let's let's see how this translates into an institution.

Is we all an institution we all know about. Okay. The institution was founded here in my sole.

Aim in 1636. In 1636, a lot of stuff has happened, right?

You know, that was before Descartes. That was before Hobbes was before Locke, before Hume, before the nails and biology, and before he came here.

What's his name? Charles Darwin. And before, you know, Newton Maxwell.

Einstein before everything. Right. So what were they teaching?

I don't know, but over the course of years, knowledge increase.

And with the increase of knowledge, we needed more buildings. Right. And and then we needed more buildings.

And then we needed more buildings. Right. Now, in 1636, a college degree lasted four years.

Now that we have so much more to teach. People need more time to graduate, right?

You know, a college degree still lasts for years.

So the question is, how can we have this explosion of knowledge with a fixed factor, which is, you know,

four years of college or two years of a master's degree, or, you know, how how could the system process channel so much more knowledge?

With a fixed amount of time. And the answer, obviously, is that.

These are the majors that Harvard College recognizes.

Right? So you don't put all the knowledge in each brain.

You put different bits of knowledge in different brains. Yeah.

And all of these measures of human capital we have presume that it's all one variable.

And the same as capital is only one variable. Huh?

Hmm hmm. Now. And there must be a reason why your dentist is not your lawyer.

Yeah. Right that if he.

If you're a dentist. Then went to law school.

Probably he lost practice in dentistry, and he's not getting a return on his investment as a dentist while he's studying law.

And then he's not that good a lawyer because he spent so much time learning dentistry, right?

So there must be a certain optimal amount of knowledge that fits in the brain.

And we don't know if that's one gigabyte, one terabyte one, one petabyte one I don't know what.

Oh. So let's call it just one person right. Now if you aim.

So that's that's where knowledge that knowledge is we can ask the question how much knowledge do we need to make things.

And we can measure that in person. Bytes. That is, how many different persons do you need to make something?

So if a product requires one person, buying, it can be done by one person, right?

But if it requires more than one person by then you need to aggregate these person lights.

And that's what production is about. Production is about combining the knowledge of different people to make something right.

This is done in networks of individuals we call firms and in.

And because firms A are not enough, you need to network those firms with their supply chains and stuff.

So the whole economy is in some sense using knowledge to transform the world, but you need to manage that knowledge in inefficient chunks, right.

So you want to say, I know how to make hamburgers.

I don't know how to make bread. I'm going to buy the bread.

I know how to make hamburgers. I don't know how to make minced meat. I'm going to buy the meat.

Right? So? So you are. You're chaining things together so that the knowledge in is more efficiently managed.

Uh, so you can ask yourself, when you look at a product, how many, how much knowledge went into making that product.

You can say these products can be made by. By this family in Ecuador.

Um, you can say that these businesses are in some sense family businesses.

This is a subsistence farming family. These guys have to be in the market, right?

But the business itself can be a family business, say a one person buy business or one family business.

No family can make these products. The knowledge needed just does not fit in a family.

And you might say that no country can make this product,

because the knowledge necessary to make a landing gear is so different from the knowledge necessary to make the turbines,

or the knowledge necessary to make the carpets or the toilets or the avionics and so on and so forth.

So you need to aggregate all of that knowledge across all of these geographies, all of these companies.

So in India, in the U.S., the average employee works in an organization of 100 people.

Okay. Depending on, say, me, for example, I do I work on the growth lab or do I work at the Kennedy School or do I work at Harvard University?

Well, at the Kennedy School, I think we are, I don't know, about 600, 700 people or more.

So I'm above the average. Okay. India has four times the population of the US.

By the way, why do we have so many? Why do we have 200 professors in the Kennedy School?

Well, because the people who know about municipal government are not the people who know about international affairs,

which are not the people who know about microeconomics, which are not the people who know about statistics, etc., etc.

Right. So you need to span the whole knowledge in.

A so we can infer that in India, if we look at a production, we are going to find that because they have four times the population,

the average Indian works in an organization of 400 people, right?

Oh. Real address? Oh, no.

In India, the average person works in an organization of four.

Not 400, right? And not a hundred. So what does that tell you?

It tells you that people are making low person buy products.

They don't have to aggregate that much in mind. That's much knowledge in the production process because they're making lower person by products.

Yes. Do we have a good understanding of how the product of what's produced in a country maps on to how firms are organized?

Um. Actually, it would be interesting for.

So that's that's something that's on the research agenda that it's what we like to call the general topic approach.

And I'll explain the general therapeutic approach in in a little while.

But you will do it by thinking a very, very,

very good input output matrix and know what are the things that every company is buying from other companies.

And then take these matrices of occupations where you want in every industry.

What occupations do they hire? So do we need accountants, finance people, marketing people, contract people in human resource management people,

you know, etc., etc. all of these things that need to be aggregated to run on a company that is able to make your inputs.

And so you would have a description of all the knowledge set.

And maybe if you want to get fancy, you would say, what are the patents that this company is using?

So what are the R&D outputs that this company is using. What is it based on?

So what I'm talking about is not economies of scale. These are economies of scale.

This is a big company.

If you move people around in this company, you're not going to see much difference because they're all using kind of like the same knowledge center.

Okay. So but if you move people around here you will hear the difference, right?

Because each one is bringing to the output something different. So that's what we like to call the Scrabble theory of development.

Scrabble I like because it's a good metaphor for chemistry,

that words are different from letters in the same way as molecules are different from atoms or proteins or different from genes.

But they're all they are related. But the meaning of a letter is completely different from the meaning of awards.

Okay, okay. So the idea is that if you just have one letter, there aren't too many words we can put together.

If I give you these three letters now, you can make four words and you can make three letter words.

If I just give you one extra letter now, you can make nine words, and you can make words that are up to four letters long.

If I give you these ten letters, according to the Scrabble website, you can make 595 legal words in in English.

And obviously, if I give you the 26 letters, you can make the whole dictionary, which are several hundred thousand words.

Okay. So the idea is that the more letters you have, the more words you can make and the longer the words you can make.

Okay. That intuition is going to carry on.

So first I wanted to look at this picture and ask myself which one is more productive.

Obviously this guy here is more productive than that guy there. The neoclassical model will say this is because he's he's using more capital.

He's using more land. Right. And something else.

What is that something else? Well, we're going to say no.

Let's look at it from the point of view of knowhow. Who has more knowhow?

Well, that sounds like the Eskimo story again, because this guy, he knows how to take care of his own bulls.

He knows how to make his own tools. He makes his own fertilizer with dung.

Right. So there's no sense in which you can say, this guy has more knowhow in this.

This guy actually, you know, he uses, uh, a harvester.

He doesn't know how to make the harvester. Probably making the harvesters. Like making an airplane, right?

The harvester uses gasoline. He doesn't know how to make gasoline. He uses genetically modified seeds.

He doesn't know what the term means. Uh, he uses fertilizers, agrochemicals, you know, pesticides, whatever.

Don't know how to make any of that. If this machine breaks down, he knows the phone number of whom to call.

Right. So there's no sense in which you can say that this guy has more knowledge than this guy.

But you can say that this guy is a letter and a very long word.

And that word is mobilizing a lot of knowledge. He's not.

But the word is okay. So the productivity is in the network.

It's not in the individual. Right. So in our description of the world, we're going to see the world as having three kinds of things.

The first kind of things is these letters. And these letters are going to be these productive capabilities that use some kind of knowledge.

Okay. So that's the productive capability then. And then there are places and places have subsets of these letters.

Some places have more of these letters. Other places have fewer of these letters.

And then products are subsets of these letters.

To make a product you need to put the letters together. Okay.

So this is going to we're going to assume that these letters are productive capabilities that they they should be somewhat

non-tradable or difficult to train because if everything was perfectly tradable then you could make everything everywhere.

Just bring it in. But in order for production to happen in some place, something has to be there.

These are the capabilities that have to be there. And so it should be somehow non-tradable.

They shouldn't include collective knowhow, but maybe some other non-tradable inputs that you want to have the hamburger stand here.

You need a baker to buy the bread.

If the baker is not there, then you know you're not going to buy bread from abroad because when it comes, it's no longer fresh, right?

So. And and public goods.

And we're going to have a lecture on introducing public goods to this framework.

So one of the objects out there is what you might want to call an endowment matrix, which is what letters does a place have.

The other one is like a technology matrix, sort of like what capabilities are needed to make what products.

Right. We call that the PPA.

And that's going to determine who is able to make what.

So what products is a country or a place able to make.

And I say place because it could be a city. It could be a state.

It could be a country. No.

But notice a very interestingly that here when you observe everything, you can observe a logic that might have escaped you otherwise,

that some places have a lot of letters and other places have few letters.

Now, the place that has a lot of letters is going to be highly diversified.

It's going to have the letters needed to make all five products. So this guy has the letters needed to make all five products.

This guy has only three letters, can only make one product.

So the difference is in the endowment of letters gets expressed into how diversified you are.

But secondly, some words are short. In other words are long.

Short words are relatively easier to make because you only need fewer.

You need fewer letters to make the short word. So in this case, hat only uses three letters.

It's done by everybody. It's a highly ubiquitous product.

It's made by many people. The fact that it's made by many people is informative of the fact that it must be a short word.

These products are very long words and as a consequence it's only made by one country, the country that has a lot of lenders, right?

So. So here we observe everything all the letters, all the words, etc.

Suppose we cannot observe the letters. Suppose I just erase the letters.

I don't know what letters you have, and I don't know what letters go into a product.

I just know who you are. No country X product 122.

I would still see that some places make a lot of products.

We can count how many products they may call that that diversity.

Other bases make fewer products, in other places make even fewer products.

I can count that even if I don't see the letters. By the same token, I can ask how many places are able to make a product.

That's called the ubiquity of the product. So some places only make one product.

Other places make two products in other places.

I mean, some products are made in one place.

Other products are made in two places. All products are made in all three places.

I'd call that the ubiquity of the product. So countries differ in how diversified they are.

So this is Nigeria and this is Austria.

Okay. You say Nigeria, Austria? I don't know, but you know, they have you know, in in Austria you have many, many small blocs in Nigeria.

You have, you know, one big bloc. Yes.

I was just wondering, maybe I'm jumping a bit ahead, but the notion of some critical letters in the whole production process,

because you can be very diversified but highly depend on a few critical letters without which you could not transform into more complex products.

So that's that, a model of the look and take into account or I mean, it's a very good question.

We haven't pushed that agenda too steeply.

But you have this idea that if you can't master electricity, that letter goes into probably many, many words.

And so it's going to prevent you from moving into a lot of stuff.

No, but I must say that, uh, if you want to produce, uh, an idea of the critical capabilities.

That's an interesting research question. Saying so first, countries different to how diversify they are.

The countries that have more letters should be able to make more products.

Products that require more letters should be able should be made in fewer countries.

So this, for example, is fuel. Would you have many, many boxes.

And this is electronic integrated circuits. You have many fewer boxes right.

So there are many more countries that make would then countries and make the electronics.

Yes. Um, a question I had was we say that a country that has more person bias will be able to make more products.

Does this take into it?

Like we thought about how competitive advantage fits into this in a sense that they're able to make more products that they choose not to,

because they're more and more efficient at making a certain product.

M actually, what you can say is that if they're able to make the product, typically they make the product, but they choose not to make too much of it.

So it's going to show itself in the intensive margin, but not in the extensive margin.

The extensive margin is really weird. There are many, many countries that have zeros in many products.

You go to Germany? It doesn't have a zero in anything. It makes everything.

But because of competitive advantage, it decides to make very few of these things.

So, and I'm going to show you some evidence that that's that's the case.

So products that are less ubiquitous will be made by countries that are more diversified.

So I can take this this relationship just ad copy.

Im in the same matrix on the other side.

We call that the method of reflections. And ask myself for a country, how diversified, how ubiquitous are the products that you make?

You're saying, well, if I a country that has many letters, I should be able to make many long words.

Long words are less ubiquitous. On average, I should be making less ubiquitous products.

So, for example, this country makes all five products.

It makes two of these product products of ubiquity.

One, it makes two products of ubiquity two and one product of ubiquity three take the average of that.

That's A5789 51.8.

Okay. This other country makes two products of ubiquity two and one product of ubiquity three.

That's 7/3. That's like 2.33.

That's more than 1.8. So these is making more ubiquitous products.

And this guy only makes one product of ubiquity three. So it has average ubiquity three so this one has average ubiquity 1.8.

This one has average ubiquity three. So one that has more letters is making longer words on average the country.

And you can ask the same thing about products.

How diversified are the countries that make the product how they versus five are the countries that make this product.

Okay. And, you know, the countries that make this product or have diversity of the countries that make this product

have diversity for because this one has diversity five and this one has the diversity three.

So the average is four. And the countries that make this product have diversity three because this one makes five.

This morning makes one. This one makes three. That adds up to 9/3 which is three.

Okay. So so this means that I should observe these relationships that places that are more diversified

that that the places that are more diversified make products that are less ubiquitous.

This is the ubiquity of the product. This is the diversity of the place.

So we call this the k1 k0 a graph.

So some countries make many things and things that are made in few other places.

Yes, yes. My, my, uh, professor, uh, in the context of Scrabble theory in Relo, um, how would you, uh, points this letter?

Because, um, um, uh, ideally, uh, the goal of Scrabble is to get get the optimum or the maximum points based on the available letters you have.

Well, I am imagining that you are have entrepreneurs,

and the entrepreneurs are in the business of imagining a word and figuring out if they can put the letters together, okay.

And the letters that they can put together, the words that they can put together depends on the letters that they have that they find.

So I'm assuming that if you have the letters, there will be probably some entrepreneur that figures out how to combine them.

Okay. Yeah, but but the entrepreneur cannot combine letters that don't exist.

Yeah. But how how do you get this letter supporting system?

Uh, let's not go there yet.

Or, um, in principle, the letters are going to have an opportunity cost, so I'm not going to work with you if somebody offers me more money.

So there's going to be a market out there. And these, these letters are going to be being priced.

If there are there's a great diversity of letters,

then probably the demand for your letter is going to go up and places are going to be richer if you have,

because letters are complements of other letters, the more other letters are there, the more they will want you.

So the equilibrium wage you're going to get will depend on the diversity of the other letters, because that determines the things that can be done.

Okay. Uh, who wrote did you have?

Yes. Um, you measured it by, uh, products with countries export.

But fishing the is quite interesting on countries with has a lot of sanctions and

less trade because Iran and North Korea know how to produce more diverse products.

Yeah. You see that. That's right. So I'm really wanting to see do you have the capabilities needed to be good at something.

And I can look at your exports if you're able to export it and in significant quantities, it must mean that you have what it takes to be good at it.

So I'm taking it as a measure of your capabilities. If it's a distorted measure, then, then it's a distorted measure.

I really wanted to see your capabilities, but I can't directly write.

So if I have other ways of measuring those capabilities, if I know that you are smuggling missiles and stuff, then then you know.

But that's it's more an information problem than a conceptual problem.

Let me push ahead one second, because I'm going to run out of time before I run out of slides.

But this is actually the the the international trade data.

Every row is a country and every column is a product.

And the color tells you how much with what intensity that country exports that product.

And this idea of of comparative advantage.

Many people think it's it means that this matrix is going to be a diagonal diagonal matrix, but it's not a diagonal matrix.

It looks more like an upper triangular matrix that some countries make everything and other countries make few things,

but the countries that make everything make the thing,

the countries and make few things, make things that everybody makes,

and the countries that make many things make those things two, but they make things that the other countries don't make.

Right.

So in some sense, this is what we call it's a nested matrix because the upper rows, I mean, the lower rows tend to be subsets of the upper rows.

And this actually is going to be this is Chilean municipalities.

Okay Chilean municipality. So there are some municipalities that make everything, and other municipalities that make very few things.

And this is not an export, this is just production. This comes from tax data.

So when you calculate these things for municipalities, you have Santiago la and Providencia which are all municipalities of Santiago.

And here is where the penguins live. They make few things and things that everybody makes right.

And these are states in Mexico. These are cities in Turkey.

These are departments in Colombia. These are districts in Sri Lanka.

In the Colombo, the capital is down here. And these are scientific publications and these are patents.

So they all have the same flavor. They are nested. These places are more diversified etc.

And these guys that make few things make the things that everybody makes.

And and the same graphs for for a for these kinds of things.

So we're going to use these methods to try to estimate how many letters a place has and

how many letters a place has is what we are going to call economic complexity index.

And how many letters a product requires is what we are going to call this product complexity index.

Okay. Um, but to see how it works, we want to know how complex is a product.

And the first measure of how complex is a product is its ubiquity.

Okay. So if it's complex, it must be hard to make. It's must be made in fewer places.

You ask yourself, how complex is a country?

Well, the first answer to the question is how diverse it is, because the more letters you have, the more products you should be able to make.

But if we use the method of reflection, if we say a for a product, it is going to be more complex.

If, um, if it's made by countries that have low ubiquity, countries that make complex products, countries that make less ubiquitous products.

So we can calculate how ubiquitous are the products that that make that they that are made by this country.

Now, can I can ask, how diverse are the countries that make this product?

So for example, if I say diamonds, diamonds, are they complex?

Well, very few countries make diamonds. But if it were complex it means that it's a long word.

So it should be the countries that make it have many letters because they're making this long word.

So they should be able to use those letters to make other things. So they should be diversified.

But if I find that the countries that make diamonds say, like Botswana, make very few other things,

it's probably not because it's a complex word, but because it's the letter X, right?

So it's low ubiquity, but it doesn't lead the country to be diversified.

I can calculate how diversified are the countries that make this product.

Hey, I can calculate how diverse are the countries that make the products of this country makes,

and how ubiquitous are the products that are made by the countries that make this product, and so on.

And you can see these are all iterations of the same matrix.

And if you go to infinity, this becomes an eigenvalue problem.

And and in essence, that's, that's the method of the economic complexity in the algebra.

Uh, I think I'm going to let you do the algebra I'm in.

But essentially you can create um, a diagonal matrix of diversities.

And you put that diversity in the denominator. Multiplying by that is going to make these matrix these stochastic matrices.

That is that the add the rows add up to one or the columns add up to one okay.

So they're probability transformation. And so so what you have is this matrix of do you make the product or not make the product.

Um and this is just a ubiquity of, of the product.

It is a product again. And this is the diversity of a product with a diversity in the denominator to make them into stochastic matrices.

And the PCA is the second largest eigenvector, and the ECI is the second largest eigenvector of this object.

And the PCA is the second largest eigenvector of this object.

Okay. So presumably the ECI measures how complete this your capability set and the

PCI measures how complete is your is the the set of letters that you need.

How long is the word okay. So it will tell you that these products are complex and these products are not complex.

And you can put that ECI into a heatmap. And then you can ask the question, does this relate at all to income per capita.

And the answer is that, well, the blue countries here are countries with low natural resource exports.

And the red countries have a lot of natural resource exports.

Is, uh, Norway, Qatar, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Oman, etc. it's all oil exporters.

But if you control for natural resource exports, this is the relationship between the letters.

You have the economic complexity index and how rich you are.

Now. There are many things that correlate with income per capita.

But the nice thing about this one is that the error terms aren't informative.

Like for example here would say India, why are you down here?

Given how much you know you should be up here, you should be richer.

And it says Greece. How did you get to be so rich given how little you know?

Right? You shouldn't be up there. You should be down here. Well guess what?

This was done with 2008 data. And since then India has been growing by leaps and bounds and Greece got into trouble.

So actually these error terms are not just error terms, but they predict future growth.

And that means that in some sense the ECI is capturing something more fundamental than current GDP.

It's trying to capture what you know how to do, and you will eventually become as rich as how you know what to do.

Okay, so in some sense it's a more informative variable in some in some sense.

Okay. So a in when we published this work we just showed that it's more informative than institutional variables.

Than educational variables. Um and um.

And so on. A I think this is, um.

Uh, a good place to to stop.

So we've we've transformed our try a way of describing the world into thinking that, you know, what's really important is what you know how to do.

And I can observe what you know how to do by what you do. But I have to have some different ways of measuring how you know what you know how to do.

And we've developed some of them. And they say the difference in countries is,

can be observed in how many things you do and how many other places know how to do the things you know how to do, right.

And with these methods, we can extract some information that was not in the aggregate of GDP, because in the aggregate of GDP you just some things up.

I hate something because it destroys information, collapses information into one dimension.

If we looked at the spectrum of what you do. So it's kind of spectral analysis if you studied engineering or something right.

Do math. So you do as a spectrum of what you do.

And what we're capturing is that there's a lot of information in the spectrum in the letters.

So in the next lecture I'm going to talk about how can we increase the letters or what goes into increasing the letters,

and consequently in expressing them in more words and in longer words.

Right. How will we increase the diversity and the complexity of what we produce?

And what are the the market failures or the problems that arise in that process?

And then suddenly, you know, there's going to be a role for policy and there's going to be a role for people like you.

So until then, thank you.

For a while. But a small rusty on my coat.

Yeah. Because you're like, oh yeah. But like, you know, like.

That, you know, and like, uh uh, um, so yeah, it doesn't feel like my race.

It was just me and I have pictures from, uh, as well.

Yeah, that's where it is. That estimate. Is.

Right. Yeah. And guys like look that way.

Yes. I wouldn't start from scratch.

Yeah. You have a good point. Yeah, I probably he's gonna be.

