[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
And therefore out. Right now on I for.

Yeah, yeah. Yeah.

So the program this week started.

I saw you on your way out. Yeah. Yeah. It was, I think.

You must see the website. So I take that you.

Are using different things for five minutes.

Which is. Which is what a de facto was already. You know which one?

They haven't they haven't announced the cutoff for, uh, you know, for someone who's won the 2020.

But I hope it's big so that I don't feel bad about missing.

I think it's going to be just, uh, go to orientation as well as as you.

Just five seconds. Yeah. Um, okay.

Uh, and you're going to see you're going to like, right here.

Yeah, I think that's right. That's right.

Because I. Yeah. Uh oh.

It's that we're going to be a marathon. Okay.

Yeah. We're just going for you classes are there?

Okay. Yeah. Uh, no longer than your watch, so.

I like to think that this is the best for kids.

I realize what I'm trying to hear.

You all over the place. This is the president.

You go from there. Oh, that's pretty bad.

You need two seconds. I think that's kind of what you actually want.

Yeah, you do what? I was getting like this.

All right, all right. All right.

So you said he was very good.

So let's get started. Um, so, uh, you want to announce, uh, housekeeping things?

Uh, John? Yeah, there's not much, but.

And please keep your seats for the rest of the semester so that we can 18th and then speaker.

Uh, these will be posted after class A with based service when hourly rate is on this, um, according to people at home.

One, if you want a 37 discount.

What we sell you. If you want to sell.

Beautiful. Use a schedule for a year.

Most of these hours. And I think that was, uh, please, if you haven't done so, join this, that channel and make sure that you leverage it.

And we are learning too quick to share things. Uh, we are launching or after this thing, you know, maybe you can use some visualization utilization.

If so, please visit there always. So yeah. So this is a major overhaul of your classes are completely new code.

And and we took the opportunity to first of all updated with now 2022 data.

Uh, but also we changed a bunch of visualizations and the whole navigation and so on.

So so actually we're going to use the new visualizations in in this lecture, I'll show you the old ones and the new ones.

And also that next week on Thursday we're going to have our open house a of the growth lab.

And we're going to announce a bunch of, uh, our ship opportunities and, and ways to engage with, with a growth lab.

So um, today.

So let me recap what we did in the last lecture on Tuesday.

Uh, we said that, you know, the essential ingredient of the economy is not just,

you know, capital or labor and human capital, but just knowledge, right.

And that this knowledge takes three forms and takes the form of embodied knowledge in tools.

Codified knowledge encodes recipes, formulas, algorithms, routines,

how to do manuals and know how a that resides only in brains and in particular collective know how.

Because we split, we put different bits of knowhow in different heads, which is the reason why your dentist tends not to be a lawyer, right?

And know how he is like in letters in a game of Scrabble.

So know how he's specific. Different words, uh, require different letters.

So different products require different capabilities and know how is is is what's

going to make the diffusion of technology and knowledge and so on sticky because.

Cause, you know, tools you can share, codes you can share but know how is moves with enormous difficulty from brain to brain.

Production possibilities go up combinatorial with a number of of capability.

So the more letters you have, the more words you can put together.

Remember I had one letter, one word, three letters, four words, four letters, nine words, ten letters, 585 words, and so on.

And poor countries are poor because they have few capabilities.

And poor countries stay poor because they have no incentives to acquire new capabilities.

Let me show you this. This graph, this I think is probably very simple to understand, right?

Now this graph is a graph that relates what is the percentage of the dictionary, sorry, the percentage of the alphabet you have.

And this is the percentage of the dictionary you can write. Okay.

So if I gave you three letters, if I give you 10% of the of the alphabet.

So the alphabet has 30 letters, I give you three letters. How what percentage of the dictionary you could write.

And the answer, as all answers in economics is that it depends.

And if you're going to use that answer remember you say it depends and then you shut up.

Because that way people say oh he's deep okay.

So if if it depends on what what is the grammar of this economy.

Right. If all if all words are one letter long, if all words are one letter long, then you have one word, one letter.

You make one word. You have ten letters. You have to make ten words.

You have 20 letters get 20 words. So you get a very linear relationship between the letters you have and the words you're going to put together.

Okay. But let's assume that all, all words are ten letters long.

If all words are ten letters long, I give you five letters.

How many words can you make? Zero.

Right? If I give you nine letters, how many words can you make?

Still zero, right? If I give you ten letters now, you can say, maybe I can make one.

If I give you 11 letters. Oh, now it's 11.

Choose ten. That's 11. If I give you 12 letters, well, that's 12.

Choose ten. That's 12 times 11 divided by two.

That 66. So suddenly, beyond a certain threshold, this starts, stuff starts to move up.

So, um, in this paper, which is a paper I wrote, was selling algorithm 2011, in the Journal of Economic Growth in.

We try to say, okay, this is sort of like so suppose you have a random number of letters and,

and those letters go randomly into words a this these are the parameters here that that you observe.

The question is can we calibrate the model to the data of the world to figure out if the world is linear, if the world is convex?

Okay. And this is what we found with different data sets.

These are a, you know, with a international trade data, with a harmonized system, with a city, C with Nikes and different classifications.

A the narrowest is this is I, a the harmonized system at six digits is like 6000 products.

Our estimated curve is something like this. So you need a lot of the dictionary to start making words.

Right now the slope of these curves matters because the slope of a curve is what is the payoff of an extra letter.

So if you are here, not only are you getting very little from your letters,

but any extra letter is not very useful because there aren't too many combinations.

If you if I give you an extra letter.

But if you're here and I give you an extra letter, that letter can now combine with all the other letters you have and can generate a lot of stuff.

Okay. So we call this the quiescence drop that you know that in it's you're trapped in the fact that, um, you don't have too many.

There's not enough there for me to want to be there. Right. This is going to generate agglomeration economies.

This is if you have the trade off between putting some letters everywhere or putting all letters somewhere.

So what does it say? I want to be nice. I want to put all letters everywhere.

But suppose you can't put all letters everywhere, and you have to choose between putting some letters everywhere and all letters somewhere.

Then what would you do? Or if you put all letters.

Some letters everywhere you are here, you get nothing everywhere.

If you put all letters somewhere, then maybe that place is here and we're going to get at least one place that has a lot of stuff, right?

But in very little else work. Right? So in some sense, you can imagine that the world has figured out.

I mean, that's one of the reasons why the world looks the way it does,

that you have this incredible agglomerations of economic activity in some places and very little elsewhere.

So anyway. Good.

So as I described in the last lecture, we see the world.

Yes. So empirically, it makes sense that both, uh, axes scale to one.

But theoretically, shouldn't they be exponential? Well, these are shares.

This is share. Suppose that God created the dictionary, and humans have yet to discover all the words that there are to be discovered.

So this is just the percentage of existing of.

Yeah. Of, of of that universe. No. Yes.

How do you measure fractions of capabilities, professor? Um, in this in this model?

Yes, you measure it. We don't.

We don't. That is, we measure these parameters here in this equation to fit some moments of the data.

But I read the paper because we actually, in invented five moments that we needed to fit.

One of the moments being this K1 this the diversity and average ubiquity have this negative slope.

That was one moment that we needed to fit.

And we also, you know, a, a a later on you'll see some of the other moments that we try to fit, but we don't.

We just then we do these curves by just simulating this function.

Once we have the, the parameters, the NPY, the Q DNA and so on.

So in the world is a world that is composed of these three kinds of elements.

One is capabilities, another one is places and another one is products.

Right. And that places are going to make the the products for which they have the capabilities.

And we discovered that the more letters you have, the more products you can make.

The more product, the more letters a product requires, the fewer the countries that can make it.

So the lower the ubiquity, the harder it is to make sense, made in fewer places,

and that consequently places that have more more letters not only make more things,

but they make things that are harder to make, things that are made in fewer places.

Okay,

so now we have redefined the problem of development as the problem of getting more capabilities and expressing them in more words and in longer words.

Okay. That's what development is about. Uh, I don't know if you took, uh, three semesters to get there, but that's what development is about.

And so the question is, how do we get more letters? And the answer has to do with the answer to this problem.

Okay. Um, that to diversify means that you're start doing things that you were not doing before.

That's by definition kind of know.

But so you are doing things you are not doing before, but you typically don't know how to do the things you don't do.

So how do you start doing the things? Uh, how do you start doing new things if to do them, you have to know how to do them,

but you don't know how to do the things you don't do is you can't make watches without watchmakers.

But how do you become a watchmaker in a place that doesn't make watches?

So how do you solve this problem of a new capability that is needed by an industry that does not exist?

And how can an industry exist if that capability is not there?

Okay. That is the chicken and egg problem if you want.

No one complained that this is not a chicken, but a rooster. Uh.

And that, we say, has to do with this classification problem.

There are two animals here that are highly related to each other and one animal that is different.

Very different. Um, and if I asked, you know, which of the two are related to each other?

And which one is different? Because he.

Right. Sorry. Well, I mean, it's obvious that the lion and the zebra come from Africa, right?

But you could say no. The zebra eats grass and the others don't eat grass.

Or they are at different trophic levels. No, but I didn't want that answer.

I wanted a Scrabble answer. And if you use Scrabble, a zebra is just a bear with an extra Z.

And a lion. So if you want to go from bear to zebra, you have to solve one chicken and egg problem.

If you go from bear to zebra, from bear to lion, from bear to zebra, you have one letter missing, one chicken and egg problem.

From bear to lion. You start with four letters you don't need and you need four letters you don't have.

So this would be close and that would be far.

Okay. In Scrabble space. All right.

That intuition. So if you see the letters, it's very easy.

But if you don't see the letters, how would you do it? To know you know which things are close and which things are far.

And where we came up is the following intuition.

If you have the capabilities to make right hand, right hand side choose, you probably have the capabilities to make left hand side choose.

Right. And so you would observe that countries that export right hand side choose also export left hand side choose.

Right. So what's the intuition that if two products use very similar letters, countries that have the capabilities to make product,

they should also have the capabilities to make product B, I should observe that they make both A and B.

Is that clear? So that's what should happen that that we call that the phenotypic level of phenotypes and genotypes.

Genotypes are the genes. The phenotypes are the same or are the animals.

So you observe the animals and you're trying to infer something about not what their genes are,

but how similar are the genes across two two products when you cannot observe the letters?

Yes. Just a clarification. Just a clarification question.

Um, so in your thinking about, um, capabilities, this doesn't just include, say, patterns in science, but it also includes organizational structure.

No. How are people working on things? There's sort of a whole block of things that are encompassed with utilities.

Yeah. So I think of capabilities as including the collective knowhow needed in that step of production and the collective know how and,

and actually the products that are related to things that you cannot shipping.

So things that have to co-locate with you. Right.

So maybe you are a company A you want to have electricity, but you're in a country that cannot get its electricity act together.

And it's very hard to internalize electricity efficiently.

So, so it's it's something it's a non-tradable capability that needs to be there for you to be there.

But it may mean, not necessarily be in your company.

It could be in your supply chain, but a non-tradable supply chain we're going to in, uh, next week, relax a little bit.

The trade ability assumption to allow us to understand you, no more remote places versus less remote places.

And how how does that control.

But so the idea is what we're going to calculate is the conditional probability of U being good at product B if you're good at product B.

So for example here you have three products diodes transistors and semiconductor.

It's mostly semiconductors right. Electronic micro circuits and printed circuits.

These are three products in the classification. This product is made by nine countries.

This product is made by 15 countries. This product is made by 11 countries okay.

It just so happens that of these nine countries eight countries also make this one.

And of these 11 countries, eight countries also make this one.

And of these 15 countries, nine countries make this one and eight countries make that one.

Okay. By the way, it already tells you something of which one is harder to make and which one is easier to make,

and so on, because 15 countries make this one. So probably this one is the easiest one to make, right?

And this one is made by nine and this one by 11. So maybe this one is the second easiest one to make.

And this is the hardest one to make. But um, if you make this one.

So if you're one of these nine, eight of you also are making this one.

Right. So what's the conditional probability of being good at B given that you're good at a.

Well in this case it would be 8/9 here.

In this case if you're going from here to there it would be 8/11.

If you're going from there to here it would be 8/15 okay.

Yes I think it was your first rule. You'd go ahead I don't care.

You can call me first. Okay. Uh, my question was, so what about let's say we take the example of commodities so rare earth metal,

because it's the process of extraction is not that complex in a sense.

You use your microphone. Right.

So if we use if we think of commodities, for example, um, and rare earth metals, for example,

um, uh, I would, I would guess that the extraction process is not very complex.

At the same time, it would be concentrated among a few countries that this size of these resources.

So do you have any do you discriminate between products or you just it's a general result.

I'm just showing now how you go and calculate conditional probabilities.

It's conditional probabilities is just A, A and B divided by the probability of A right.

So maybe mining is mining. You just grab Earth and stockpile it, right?

Maybe I don't know. Zirconium is a weird mineral, right.

And it's exists in very few places. So you would find that its ubiquity is very low.

The product complexity index, you want to say, well, because its ubiquity is very low.

It maybe it's very complex, but the product complexity index doesn't get confused because it says, well,

if zirconium was very complex, then the countries that make it should have a lot of words, a lot of letters.

But if they have a lot of letters, because their economy is a long word, they have a lot of letters.

They should be diversified. So but if the countries that produce their corneum are not very diversified, it's going to punish its complexity.

So the method will tell you the product complexity index is supposed to tell you a little bit how long is that word.

Okay. So we're going to say conditional probabilities is a measure of the distance between A and B.

Okay it but we're going to change it a little bit.

So it's the conditional probability of getting good at product one given that we are good at product two.

But a and by the way M in terms of our algebra it's it's this it's this matrix.

This is the matrix is a matrix of countries and products.

It's pre multiplied by a matrix of diversity.

So it's a diagonal matrix that has zeros everywhere except in the diagonal.

In the diagonal it has one over two. The diversity of the country okay.

Multiplied by the transposed MCP which is again normalized by this diagonal matrix which has in the diagonal one over the ubiquity of the product.

So when you divide by the ubiquity of the product or the diversity of a country, you're making it into a stochastic matrix.

Now it will add up to one. A stochastic matrix is where things add up to one.

So you can interpret them as probabilities okay. So what's so so this is just the conditional probability of being the proximity between 1 and 2 you

would say is the conditional probability of you you making one given that you already make two.

So it's eight given over 15 or 8 over nine okay.

So that's that's what it is now. Yes. Sorry.

What are these products. What means multiple countries to be sorry.

What do you do with products with multiple countries to be one factors like well then when it goes from one country to the other,

it takes the form of an intermediate product and the intermediate product has a code.

So what if the knowledge is the only thing which goes from 100?

Then we're screwed. In.

Yeah, yeah. A little bit of the prior question in terms of ubiquity versus diversity.

I remember in velocity you show graph in which India was below the curve,

and then that was used as a way to say potentially India has the capabilities to increase its diversity, not known to be richer.

Do you not know that one was the economic complexity index and GDP per capita?

Right. It says for its complexity, India is too poor, right?

It should be richer. Okay. That was that graph. Makes sense. So but then we said the following.

There's a lot of noise in the data. And we wanted to get rid of the noise.

So let me tell you a little bit how this conditional probability works.

Suppose you have two products. One is ostrich eggs and one is wine.

Which country makes ostrich eggs? Australia, South Africa.

Okay, so you export ostrich eggs.

What's the conditional probability of making wine given that you make.

Ostrich eggs 100%. 100%. Right.

So you would say, oh, wine and ostriches eggs. Obviously they are related right now.

What's the conditional probability of making okay?

So. So this is one as you as you said. Now, on the other hand, lots of countries produce wine.

What's the probability that a country that produces wine also produces ostrich eggs?

Very soft. That's very low.

Right. Because you have in the denominator we have all the countries that make wine.

In the numerator. You only have South Africa. Okay.

So what we did in order to subtract the noise is we took the minimum of the conditional probabilities.

We said let me calculate it. Know A the probability of B given A and the probability of A given b.

And let's take the minimum, which essentially means that you take the.

If you put in the denominator the product that is the most ubiquitous.

And that way you generate a matrix of distances that is symmetric.

So the distance between A and B is the same distance as the distance between DNA.

Okay. That's just a trick we did. So you end up with something like this.

Okay. It's a matrix of distances Jordan you're you're taking the this MCP matrix.

Which is a matrix of countries and products. Right? And you are going to collapse it into a product product matrix.

Okay. And the product product matrix is going to say, you know, what's the minimum conditional probability of going from A to B.

It's like a distance okay. Now you see this here right.

This is a kind of like weird representation right.

If I put these things in a map it will be much more intuitive because these are cities, right?

In the U.S. if you show me the map of the U.S., then I would say, oh, here is Atlanta.

Yes, the distance to Boston and the distance to Chicago.

Now, this all makes sense to me, right? Because they are in the map.

So no problem. Okay, so if I did this, don't you want to see a map so you can get us on now I understand.

This way. You you don't understand, right? They're just numbers.

But if you see it on the map, I know, I understand, right? Okay, so we decided I was here in 2006.

I had this, and I wanted to see the map. I understood that these were distances.

So I read serendipitously a book by Laszlo Barnabas, which I, I really recommend it.

And the book is called linked, and it was my introduction to network Science.

And so. And suddenly I get an invitation to a talk that he was giving here at Harvard.

So I sent him an email and said, look, can we go out for lunch?

And we went out for lunch. And I explained to him this thing and he said, yeah, sounds interesting, let's collaborate.

And that was the origin of, of the paper. So. So in my mind, I had this metaphor, uh, that I'm an elaborate metaphor in a little while,

but, um, but the idea was that products are like trees in a forest.

And the distance between products has to do.

I have the matrix of distances with these conditional probabilities.

So the distances of products is like the distances of the trees in the forest.

So in this forest a bear and zebra should be close to each other and bear in line would be very far away from each other.

So the question is what's the shape of that forest? And if you if you put it in, you ask the computer to represent it as a network.

That's what it came up with. Okay.

So this was using a software called cityscape.

Is it still commercially used. See site to escape.

And it just is the representation of this matrix here.

It products our circles, and the size of the circle is proportional to world trade in that product.

Okay. And, uh, these circles are connected by these links.

And actually the strength of the link, if you see, is a little bit the color of the they use something which is called the spring.

Algorithm which thinks of of this distance as being like a force on a string.

And these balls like to locate themselves in in space.

This thing here is a garments cluster. This here is um.

And brown is agro. Agro processed food.

And this is construction materials. These are machineries.

These are truck cars and these are trucks. These are chemicals and these are electronics.

And then there's a periphery of products that are very poorly connected.

They're kind of like there's a tree out there, but nothing very near.

This is oil. This is mining. It's kind of like very, very poorly connected products.

This is fish. Okay.

So so that's that's the shape of a forest. That's, you know, you do these conditional probabilities.

That's what comes out okay. If you want to visualize the new, um, industry space uses a different method,

something called you map in this in this space a Cartesian this distance is are not very informative.

Kind of like the information of the link is sort of like in the color of the node of the link and,

and in, but in this space the Cartesian distances are supposed to be meaningful.

They are the first two dimensions of of a polynomial that has more dimensions,

but it's the first two dimensions so, so so the Cartesian distances are are in a meaningful.

But there are more distances than just two dimensions.

So when you do it in in the new atlas, if you hover over a product, it will tell you what are the nearest products to that product.

Okay. But here you know, you have apparel here you have electronics here,

you have chemicals here you have minerals over there at the top you have this machinery and metalworking.

Things are this, this blue, this blue cluster is still there.

Right. The construction goods are kind of here. Agricultural goods are over there.

This is fish and so on. So and so. The shape is recognizable, at least for the ones who are used to the old one.

Yeah. You use algorithm to find which products are and similar to each other.

Um, but it seems like something that can be done manually and maybe even better.

Did you find any products that you didn't expect to be similar to an offering, but like it really reminds finding.

Yeah, well, for example, a thoroughbred.

Horses. Well, it just so happens that thoroughbred horses are exported by Germany and by Belgium, and they export steel and cars and airplanes.

So it will tell you that if you export steel, you export thoroughbred horses.

Uh, so that's noise. That's in the time. Would you prefer to do it manually instead of algorithmically?

Um, we're going to move in a different direction.

We're going to try to look at the letters and have a theory of what the letters are.

And that's what we call the genotypic approach. And in a few minutes I'm going to show you a different ways.

But yeah, you can clean it by hand if you want to say this makes no sense in and actually in some sense we do.

We take out things that we call scrap because everybody has scrap and doesn't tell you anything about your capabilities.

So we take out some some of those products or products are just too small and not very meaningful.

Pablo Andres, quick question.

The math is built from data for a given year or for a given period.

Well, just to again we're concerned with noise.

So we typically take the average of three years.

But you can do it for every year. Not think you can do it for any year.

But there's a lot of, uh, product more related, I think, to, uh, raw materials that are in the, in the very, very off of the market or.

Uh, so it's different effect when you, when you pick different products to get to more complex fruit,

for example, apparel industry or garment industry.

Uh, it's a different path to complex product that, for example, mining or oil that are also in the periphery.

Uh, I'm looking that region as well. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So so, um, a good question gets answered by the next slide.

So what we can do and it's not represented here is calculate these two variables.

One is how long is the word.

How complex is the product. And this is. How connected is the product that is?

How dense is the forest in that part of the of the of the of the forest.

So if you think Tarzan. I don't know if Tarzan was a thing when you were growing up.

It was a thing when I was growing up. Tarzan has been canceled.

Yeah, but he would jump from. From tree to tree.

And if the trees are close to each other, it's easy to jump from tree to tree.

But them. But if they're not close from each other, it's very hard for the monkey for for for for for for Tarzan to jump.

So, um, this is how how dense is the forest around that part?

And this would say oil and mining are down here.

They are very low complexity and very poorly connected text, garments and machinery.

You see garments are super connected and machinery super connected.

So if you make one kind of garment, you have the capabilities to make many other kinds of garments.

If you make one kind of machine, you have the capabilities to make other kinds of machine.

That's what makes the forest dense, okay.

But garments are much less complex than machinery.

Okay, so you might as you orient yourself in this space, you want to know not only how complex is the problem,

but also how how connected it is, because then it's kind of like a stepping stone to the next thing.

One problem. I think that is very interesting, that oil has a very low level of connectedness, and maybe it has to do with the course of resources.

But if you have a whole like natural resource reserve, maybe you can have incentives to develop.

That might be one explanation. It could be that if you know how to make oil, it means that you know how to dig holes on the ground.

So if any other industry needs holes on the ground, they will give you a car because you know how to make holes on the ground.

But it just so happens that very few other industries need to make holes on the ground of sedimentary rocks, right?

So it's kind of like a very it's like the letter X.

It doesn't go into many other things. So it could be that exploration, not a political economy explanation.

But obviously the political economy explanation is so you don't know what's causing this.

But I would put it to you that if you know how to make one kind of machine, you can figure out how to make many other kinds of machines.

If you know how to make holes on the ground, how many other things to do?

Alvaro. Yeah, I don't know if I'm saying correctly that somehow mechanics is just as complex as making ships.

Um, is that kind of noise? Or there is like, uh, uh, technical explanation behind that.

I mean, just is just unacceptable. But yeah, so, so no, it's very interesting.

You know, very few countries make ships and relatively few countries make specialty metals.

Like, everybody can make, uh, simple metal.

So, so by the way, these are categories and these are the real numbers are you can do it with 6000 products.

This is we aggregated to it to be more readable.

But you know that the aim. So.

So you give it as a general orientation of where that bundle of products lies.

There might be some that are super complex, others that are less complex, that are average there.

So the question now if I have the forest, how do I represent the place?

I told you that their products, their capabilities and their places, but we cannot observe the capabilities.

We don't observe the letters. We are trying to infer everything without being able to observe the letters.

So what is a place? A place we say has a set of capabilities.

Okay, but I don't observe the capability. So how do I know that you have the capabilities?

Well, because we are able to make things.

So I can infer that you have to know how to make the things you make.

Because to make the things you need to know how to know how to make them. And if I observe you making them, it means that you know how to make them.

Okay, so so then I want to know what are the capabilities of a place.

And for that, I'm going to use my forest and ask myself, where in this space do you have capabilities expressed in products?

So in the metaphor, where in this space I affirm in this,

in this metaphor is a monkey that lives on the tree, lives off a tree, it exploits a certain tree.

So I can figure out where are the monkeys in this space? And in the old product space.

This is where Venezuela had its monkeys.

In 2021, it had a big gorilla here and and not much else.

And I can compare Venezuela to Mexico. So you see Mexico has many more monkeys.

So in fact, they have many more letters. And the Economic complexity index would confirm that.

But you might say, well, the thing is that Venezuela used to have 30 million people.

Mexico has 130 million people. So maybe it's just because Mexico is bigger.

So I say no, no. Let me compare Mexico to Austria, which is a country of 8 million people.

So this is Venezuela, Mexico, Austria, Mexico, Austria.

Mexico, Austria. Okay, so many more monkeys in Austria, even though there are only 8 million people, right?

Em. Now this is with a new atlas. This is Venezuela.

This is Mexico and this is Austria. So, Mexico.

Austria. You see how it's taken over Mexico?

Austria. See how they're taking over Mexico.

Okay, so so now the question is, do these monkeys move?

Juan Pablo, do you have many countries that produce petroleum and also a lot of other routes because, um, is a well, remember.

So a forward here, it will depend.

So there are most oil exporting countries tend to be quite concentrated, but they're mainly oil exporting countries.

So that that ubiquity of oil is relatively high.

So that will go in the denominator. And then the numerator will go how many countries make electronics and oil.

So Mexico is one arm. But very very few other oil exporting countries also make electronics.

So it will say electronics and oil are far more important.

Okay good. So so now we want to know if monkeys move.

Okay. And in. And to show you that monkeys do move.

I'm going to compare Thailand with Ghana and okay.

And these are two countries that started with similar levels of low education.

But Ghana increased its education more than Thailand.

And education in Ghana is in English.

Education in Thailand is entirely which is a nice language, but there are very few people outside of Thailand that speak Thai.

So you could say, well, if you know, since know how is education, then we know Ghana will beat the [INAUDIBLE] out of Thailand, right?

But this is Ghana and this is Thailand in the product space.

By the way a I am highlighting.

So I am leaving in opaque the the product space.

And I'm just highlighting in these places where the monkeys are. Okay.

So you see that both started with very few monkeys in in 1965.

Okay. So and I want you to pay attention to to how these things move.

So this is 65, 70, 75, 80, 85 1995 2000 2005 2010.

I'll do it again. Okay. Okay. Okay.

8595 2025 2000. Okay.

Let me go more slowly. Once more. So they both start like nowhere.

Then suddenly you have these two monkeys in the garment cluster, and then, boom, monkeys jump all over the garment cluster and boom!

Now they've moved to this full cluster, and we get these two monkeys here in the electronics cluster,

and then, boom, they take over the whole electronics cluster.

Right. And look at the garment cluster. Now they've taken over and on.

And in 1990 and now we started to get monkeys in the central cluster of machinery.

In 2000, 2000. And now they're developing these monkeys here and these monkeys there.

And they're starting to abandon the monkeys in the garments cluster.

Okay. So this was Ghana's exports in 2019.

In 1962, when we started, hey, it's mostly cocoa and minerals and wood.

This color means you eat it. This color means comes out of the earth, but you don't eat it.

Okay. And so and this was 1962.

This is Ghana in 2010. So they move from cocoa beans to cocoa butter, cocoa based cocoa, unsweetened cocoa powder.

It seems to show some diversification by the same.

Manganese is more or less the same colors. And this is what happened to exports per capita at constant dollars.

They started around $200 of exports per capita, and they ended up at around $100 of exports per capita in constant dollars.

These were the exports of Thailand in 1962.

Same colors. You know, again, this this, you eat, this you don't eat and some minerals and stuff.

And this is Thailand now. And they move from $50 of exports per capita to $2,400 of exports.

Okay. And so their GDP completely diverged.

How? Schooling did not diverge. And Ghana was beating Thailand in this period.

But GDP diverged and monkeys diverged.

Okay, so monkeys do move okay. Now I can look at, you know, diversification of countries over the product space.

Oh, and how many monkeys jumped, by the way, when we say.

A monkey jumps, typically we mean you were producing very little of the stuff and suddenly

you produce a lot of other stuff and bruising very little or producing a lot.

We quantify using this concept called reveal comparative advantage and revealed

comparative advantage is simply how big is this product in your export basket?

Relative to how big is this product in the world's export basket?

So for example, if in Venezuela, oil exports are 90% of Venezuela's exports, but oil represents 5% of global exports, 90% divided by 5% gives you 18.

That's a huge revealed comparative advantage in oil.

Okay. But if we produce 1% of cars and our exports and cars are 5% of global exports, then we would have 1% divided by 5%.

That would be 20%. If my revealed comparative advantage is one, it means that I'm exporting with the same intensity as the world.

Okay. So typically we say a monkey A is there when you have revealed comparative advantage above one.

That's but it's actually some little bar that you can move in the in the atlas, and you can choose your answer here.

Yes. When we were looking at the maps of Ghana and Thailand, um, what we're looking at, exports or just production, even domestic only exports,

because all of this is done with international trade data,

because international trade data has the same classification for all countries, because products move across country.

So there's a bill of lading in the exporting country, in the importing country.

So they have harmonized stuff. The problem with production is that it's much harder to find harmonized data sets that use the same classification,

but it's very easy to do subnational. So it's much easier to look at production subnational.

And we have this other website called metaverse, which is a website of cities.

And in that website we look at production, both tradable and non-tradable government, non-government.

Everything is there. But in this. So you see, this is the number of monkeys that jumped between 2000 and 2015.

76 monkeys jumped in China, 70 in in Thailand, 48 in Vietnam.

Okay. And and they added enormous $331 billion in new products.

Right. $50 billion in Vietnam.

That's 500 and $545 per capita in new dollars.

That's the record here, right? So Vietnam is doing very well, but we were working on Sri Lanka and in Sri Lanka we saw very few monkeys jumping.

Um, actually, we can ask a question and I think you should ask the question,

am I observing the number of jumps I would expect, given how you're positioned in the product space?

That is, are you screwed because your monkeys are on the periphery, or are you screwed because your monkeys are [INAUDIBLE]?

Right or lazy or drunk.

So all of this, you know, you can see countries transformation.

This is China's market share in the world.

And by the way, the US produces market share graphs.

The US market share in the world in a in China became 10% of the world's government market around 1988 or so.

Okay. And then it became 10% of the world's electronics market in three around the year 2001 or so.

And then it became 10% of my senior market, I don't know, around 2020.

So you see that they're moving from garments to electronics to machinery.

So there's a certain method to the madness. This is Thailand.

These are garments and these are these are garments.

Okay. Then they move to electronics and then they move to machinery.

And once they move to electronics and machinery they started to move out of garments.

This is Tunisia. We move them to garments.

Then they moved a little bit into electronics and a little bit into machinery, but not unlike the others.

And this is Sri Lanka. We moved into garments and the state in garments and very little else.

Right. So, so it begs the question why?

Why did they get stuck and so on. So.

We ask you a question do monkeys prefer to jump short distances?

Okay. And for here I'm going to introduce a set of terms.

One term is density. In this term everybody uses density.

Nobody in this literature everybody uses density. Nobody knows why it's called density.

And the idea is the density of the monkeys around a tree.

You want to know how densely surrounded by monkeys is this tree.

So you want to look at a tree, and you want to know how far the monkeys are in the, in the vicinity.

Okay. Um, we're going to define something we call the Complexity Outlook Index, which is how well you are positioned in the product space.

How close are you, your monkeys, to good empty trees?

Are your monkeys well positioned for diversification because they have many bear two zebra links that they can exploit?

Where are they in the boom box of being a lion with nothing nearby?

Okay, and complexity outlook game.

This is going to be a measure per product of how strategic would be for you to conquer a particular tree,

because it would help you continue to jump into other trees.

Okay. So I'm going to define these tree terms. So fruit density is is this idea here I'm going to this here is the product space.

This is the distance between product B and product B prime okay.

So you are in product B you are in product your country C you are in product B I'm in product

B I'm going to look at all the products that you make weighted by how far they are from you.

All the products that you make MCP means it's one.

If you make it, it's zero. If you don't make it. So all the products that you make, you're going to add A11 times the distance.

So this is the weighted distance of the products of the products that you made, the distance to this particular product divided by all of this.

So this is a normalization factor. So this is how close are your monkeys to this empty tree.

This is going to be a country product measure. It's going to be for this country.

This product is near or this product is far is near because there are many monkeys around it.

Okay. So before we had a distance between two products.

Now this is a distance between a country and a product. So this is between a country.

And the pandemic has to do with a distance of all of its monkeys to the product.

Okay. So this is this is density. How well positioned you are in the product space is this other formula that says how close are you.

This is going to be a country variable not a country product variable.

It's going to be a country variable. It's going to be one number per country.

So we're going to add over all the countries.

So. This is going to be. How close are you?

So the distance between the density. How close are you?

This is the density. This variable we have here. Density. So this is the density.

How close are you to the products you are not making?

Weighted by how sexy are those products. So this is how close are you to empty to go to empty trees.

Okay. How close are your monkeys to go to empty trees.

And and this is what you have here on the x axis.

You have how many letters you have. This is the economic complexity index.

And on the y axis is how well positioned you are in the product space.

Okay. This is the complexity outlook index okay.

And it says India is the best located country.

So it has it has many empty trees near its monkeys, many good empty trees near its monkeys.

But the other country I was making fun of was Greece.

Right. And Greece is the second one here. So it also has it was at the opposite end of the regression line.

There was two poor. Two rich were how little they know how to do.

Okay. Venezuela by the way is here. So Venezuela not only has very few letters, but it's a it's very poorly positioned in the product space.

Mexico is here okay. And Austria is here now why is Austria so low?

They have many letters. They have more letters and Mexico. But why is Austria so low?

Why is Austria so low? Before I go to your questions, why is Austria so we have time?

I would guess that I would guess that there are very few entries.

Correct. So they have already absorbed all of the technology there is to absorb there.

Monkeys are everywhere, so the only way Austria can progress is if Austria plants new trees or invents new products.

Does innovation of the global frontier? Yeah, and that's typically what happens to the advanced countries that they have.

They already do everything. There is no development by just starting to do things that the world knows how to do.

But you didn't know how to do. Okay.

Yes. So like looking at this, uh, graph, I think like Austria and Sweden all have like the same,

uh, complexity, but like, they have, like, different, uh, like, you know, like empty.

Yeah, yeah. Japan has more empty trees because Japan has actually abandoned quite a few things.

So that's, that's like they, they have potential, but they're not doing it.

Yeah. Uh, by the way, we we just finished a paper actually, with a GMO on Japan.

I'd like your opinion. Okay. Yeah, maybe we're completely wrong.

We applied kind of complexity thing.

We are trying to solve the puzzle. Why is it that Japan is so complex?

It's number one in complexity, in know numbers and and and right.

Does it grow so little. And we came up with the response when you know um, could you explain like the x axis y um,

the number of letters can be that it's normalized to zero is the average.

Oh. Uh, yes.

This is easy, IRA. It's Asia. Asia normalized to zero.

Okay. So now this shows that your position, your your ECI is going to grow as a function of how well positioned you are in the product space.

So here we run regressions where the dependent variable is economic complexity index.

And the independent variable is your initial economic complexity and your initial complexity outlook how well positioned during the product space.

And this says that obviously your future economic complexity five years down the

road or ten years down the road is related to your initial economic complexity,

but your complexity outlook helps explain how quickly you you move.

That is, if you are well positioned in the product space, you tend to have an easier time of diversification and your complexity increases.

And actually, because you have this lag term, you can figure out what is the long term effect of economic complexity.

So you see, you have to take this term and one minus this term to calculate the long term effect of economic complexity.

So in the end you kind of like grow to a position that has to do with how well how well positioned are you were in the beginning.

Okay. So. We are now going to run a growth regression.

And in this growth regression now we are putting growth on the left hand side growth in the dependent variable.

And we are going to put initial GDP per capita.

And this is the traditional convergence term. And we're going to put the increase in natural resource exports per capita.

We are not trying to explain that. We're just taking it as something not explained by the model okay.

And then we put the initial economic complexity index and the complexity outlook index.

And they both come in and they increase the explanatory power significantly.

And when you put both of them together they both come in.

So a so, so we think that we've now captured a variable that seems to be related to growth that, you know,

countries if you have more than enough letter to be richer than you are saying, like India, you are going to grow fast.

And if you're well-positioned, the product space, you're going to grow fast.

So India is going to grow fast. So that's now okay.

And so so now we are going to make these two variables that we used in this equation.

The first one is your current economic complexity index conditional on your initial level of income.

So this is this will be this will make it good for India bad for Greece okay.

And that's this variable here okay.

So this error term. And the other one is how well positioned during the product space.

So that gives us a two by two matrix in which and the x axis is do you have more than enough letters to be richer than you are.

Is your ECI above your expected? Is your income above or below your expected income given your ECI?

And are you well positioned in the product space or not?

And this is the happy place where you have more than enough letters to be richer than you are, and in addition, you're close to empty trees.

This one is a little bit like a no, it's it's you have more than enough letters to be written, and you are, but it's hard for you to find new trees.

This in Austria was kind of like here, this one needs more letters like Greece, but it's easy for them to get them because they're well positioned.

And these one needs more letters, say like Venezuela. But it's hard for them to get more letters because they're very far away from the forest.

Okay. So now we have kind of like a way of thinking of strategy given the cards you are dealt with.

And since we did all of this empirically, you know, we can very quickly do it.

And by the way, this is with all data, the odds loss does it with current data.

Okay. It does it for you.

Now in addition you can ask yourself the question how strategic is a product for a country?

Would it be particularly useful to you to get into this industry and to capture that?

What we do is we calculate your position in the product space, assuming that you don't make this product.

And we calculate your position in the product space, assuming that you do capture that tree that you do get into.

So what is the delta in terms of improving your position in the product space?

If you were to jump to that tree okay.

And this is also something that the Atlas does for you, it will create these kinds of graphs where this is density.

This is how far is the product from your monkeys.

And this is how strategic it would be for you to move in that direction.

We call it opportunity game. Okay, now, it's interesting that in South Africa, the sexy things that the more strategic things are farther away.

In Germany. The more strategic things are nearby and the things that are farther away are less sexy.

But each country is going to have one of these groups, and this is useful.

This is kind of like risk and this kind of return.

And ideally you want to move here. Right. But here there's nothing.

So if you want to move nearby you don't want very long jumps then your opportunities are very lousy.

Right. But if you want out an industry that will generate more options, then you know you will have to have longer distances.

But if you are really going to jump to this distance, you might as well go here then down here.

Right? So if you think this is risk and this is return, so it helps you orient yourself strategically in terms of which products to target.

Okay. Okay. So so this is our our new atlas with our new product space.

And as I as I mentioned a it it's.

A it's brand new. It's version 10.0.

So play with it. But let me show you some other spaces.

One, one. You know, I took the MQB matrix and I collapsed it into a p matrix by using countries to,

to calculate a distance between products, and it made it into a product space.

One thing that occurred to us that why don't we just reverse it?

And I have start with a country product matrix, and I use products to calculate the distance between countries.

So two countries are going to be similar if they make similar things say with similar intensity.

So if you take the exports of Korea and the exports of Japan, you get this correlation that the two export baskets look very similar.

Okay. As a correlation of point 71. So a we calculated the similarity of the export baskets of different countries.

And then saying okay, these two countries seem to have the same letters because they make the same things.

So instead of thinking of a product based let's think of a country space okay.

So the Czech Republic and Germany, Finland and Sweden, Lithuania and Latvia, it's very interesting.

Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana. What we found is that no neighbors produce the same things.

So we published a paper in 2013 where the lead author was my PhD student, Danny Bahar, that said,

this is evidence of knowledge spillovers that you do what your neighbor does because

it's easier to learn from your neighbors than to learn from people who are far away.

And we created this a country space.

Okay. And where each each country is, is a node here.

And it's connected to the two countries it's most connected to.

And the link is either blue or red,

depending on if your similarity comes from natural resource products or you similarity comes from industrial products because you say,

well, you're like your neighbor because you share the same geology, the same geography, in the same climate as your neighbor.

So maybe you have the same agricultural and the same minerals, but the red ones is not.

The red ones is all manufacturer thing.

And it's very interesting that Germany is very similar to Austria, which is very similar to Slovenia, by the way, Slovenia is right there,

which is very similar to Italy, which is right there, right here, which is very similar to Spain, which is very similar to Portugal, and so on.

So this in our mind suggests, and especially if the link is very red, and it suggests a similarity in in knowledge spillovers,

Bangladesh is very similar to Sri Lanka, which is very similar to in Cambodia, which is very similar in this case to Salvador.

And the similarity there comes from garments. These are all garment exporters, that's all.

So we can calculate country space density in the same way as we calculated product space density okay.

So to. Yeah. It's to say, you know, the products make sense.

You say? You make product A, I would expect you to make product B because A and B are related.

Huh. In this case, you say you make shoes.

You are like Italy. Italy should be making shoes.

Okay, so if you're close, you should be making the same things.

So the product spacing is countries are more likely to start exporting products that are similar to the products they currently export.

The countries space says countries are more likely to export products that similar countries already export.

Okay, so you're looking for similarities.

And once you're looking at similarities across products, the other one, you're looking at similarities across countries.

So what we did is this we said ourselves, imagine I give you the MCP, the matrix of countries and products,

and I erase a number, I erase an entry and I ask you to guess how much it say, this is shoes in Spain.

You say I, I erase the information of shoes in Spain. And I ask you, how many shoes does Spain?

Produce or export. You have the whole matrix. Well, one answer would be.

Let me see the intensity with which Spain produces similar goods like shoes.

And I'm going to use that to guess how many shoes you produce.

And then I'm going to look at what countries are like Spain and where to look.

How many shoes do they produce? One is a products based density.

One is the country's space density. And it's also happens that both have predict this number that I raised.

And then I can look at the number okay.

And it does a pretty good job at predicting how many shoes the Spain export by looking at how many things like shoes,

the Spain export and how many shoes are exported by countries like Spain.

Okay, there's a pretty good job. But this is the exciting part.

If this doesn't get you excited, don't get into research. Know we said, okay, I can predict this number I hit okay.

I can predict the number that I hit. And I'm in predicting I make a mistake.

I make a mistake. Okay. Is the mistake noise or is it a mistake?

Does the mistake contain information? Is that.

So I'm going to take that residual, the mistake I made.

And I'm going to use it to predict future growth, or I'm going to use it to predict whether the monkey's going to jump there.

Okay. Well, and guess what? The residual product space is predictive of future growth.

The predictive country space is predictive of future growth. If you put them both the residual is predictive of future growth.

Okay. So both of them come in.

If you add information for example a in a the initial industry location exports or the initial population or the global industry size or you know,

all these other controls, the stuff remains the same.

If you actually put product industry fixed effects and location fixed effects, the stuff remains all the same.

If you even put information such as how much did the industry grow in the world and how much did exports grow in this country?

Information you would not have had at the beginning. We call that radial growth.

If you had grown, if this export had grown like all the other exports of the country, or if the market share of this country had remained constant.

Vis-a-vis you know, the world market. If you control for that, you still remain the same.

So. So that means that we are capturing something that is more fundamental, that current production capture, something about potential production.

And we call that paper implied comparative advantage.

So we can sort of like I can observe your comparative advantage, but I can guess your comparative advantage in things you're currently not making.

Okay. So this kind of like is a way of getting at the risk of moving in a certain direction.

I think you. Yeah. Um, can you expand a bit, uh, the result, because, uh, the perceive approach is based on negative sign.

So you feel it's the residual of the previous equation?

Okay. So it has the right thing and we can calculate how good is our prediction.

And these predictions are good essentially out of decades out their best.

They're not good at one year to the next. This is one year to the next.

Such a. But they're much better in.

So you're capturing even some longer term thing, which is amazing because typically predictions are good in the short run end up in the long term.

This one works well in the longer term.

A this was all done with international trade data.

Here we have expanded to using other data. So this one uses industry data.

And this is what powers the industry space in the metaverse.

You have everything here. You have good services and everything.

Um, we have um, we tried to do this genotypic approach by taking a stand and saying, you know what these capabilities are?

These capabilities are occupations. And since occupations going across industries,

if you have another industry that's hiring people without occupation, those workers are available to you.

If they can be used in this in this industry. Okay.

And we created a genotypic, a genotypic product space where two products, two industries are similar.

If they use similar occupations okay, then you can say do does your country have the occupations that this blue industry would need?

How many missing occupations would there be if you wanted to move in that industry.

But it also tells you which are the missing occupations.

So what is the missing human capital that is preventing you from moving?

So that's a first. The first one, this is applying the same thing to occupation.

But here now a note is an occupation. And there are these data sets that describe occupation in terms of the knowledge,

skills and abilities that you need to have to perform that occupation.

So we can take two occupations are similar if they require similar knowledge, skills and abilities.

