[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Before. You start working.

On TV and, um, you decide to do it in.

Two levels. Um, how you can combine the two point.

000, really?

Like you can see this is pretty.

Cool. So.

Like, oh, I can like this.

Very important to get to know you.

Sorry. I'm sorry. I have a hard time, and it's just like I have to go.

Yeah. Oh, my God, this is not going to be nice to pretend you never know, because, I mean.

You know, and then on this occasion, I, I think.

I just wanted to. Show you that, um.

I feel like it went on, you know.

What? I just put on the survey, just, like, say. For example.

So I just, I don't know, I don't I.

Don't usually I'm not. Used and.

I know that there's. Something I don't know I guess not okay.

So I just, I. Mean it's it's a lot.

So thank you. And you don't know. You know. I don't know, I just really I don't know.

Yeah. Yeah yeah. Nice I will do. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah I think so.

It's like that one for me. I'm like yeah I, I look really good.

And um, but everybody knew it and I.

I don't. Think.

Anyone thought they'd get one. Yeah.

Yeah. Thank.

You so much. For that.

Question. I don't.

Know why I don't I don't.

Really truly like how to use it for tonight.

Yeah I don't know. Thank you. All right.

Thank you. Yeah. So that's the last piece, right.

Yeah. Yeah. Let's go back to all of this part of the job.

It is not like this is all just starting out.

So I would like to speak you. Know, there's something, you know, like a few weeks from this opportunity, like, I'll have, like, an hour.

Away from work, from you. And.

Good morning, everyone. That I.

Okay. Okay. Good morning everyone. Um, what's going to happen to you all outside?

So there's a lot of traffic. I might be here in a couple of minutes.

I should be there. Uh, but in the meantime, he asked us to, um, kind of start it off, and it's,

uh, there's no issue because, um, the beginning is, uh, a couple of polls.

So. Yeah. So, uh, first, um, a little bit of housekeeping, we're going to have, uh, growth lab open house this Thursday from 4 to 6.

Put in your calendars. Um, we're going to be talking about student engagement opportunities, our relationships, and so on.

Internships. Uh, a little bit of thought about our our research agenda here in the lab.

Uh, some of our insights from applied policies, research, um, applied projects, research projects.

Um, and, uh, and. Yeah, guess what else then?

Um, tomorrow we have, uh, a talk with, uh, Nathan Oleh, uh, from, uh, the, uh, International Economic Development Council.

And, uh, this is sponsored with, in conjunction with the, uh, the politics and, um, it's, uh, the beginning of our usual, uh, dev talk series.

So we're going to be having very periodically, um, uh, these sorts of, of engagements.

Yes. So tomorrow or today. Um, this is.

Oh, yeah. It's today. Yeah. I put it there yesterday. So it's it was tomorrow.

Yesterday. Um, so please sit in your assigned seats.

Uh, the problem set is now on canvas. You can check it out.

We we took a little bit because, uh, we have a new atlas, so we had to check everything with the new data and so on.

Um, and, uh, now it works with the new atlas and the new dataverse.

So basically, you're going to be working with one, uh, big data set, uh,

country product data set that's going to have variables for countries and for products and for product country pairs.

Um, you're going to have to merge those, uh, that data set with two labeled data sets.

And the problem set is very explicit on how. But if you have any questions, you can always, uh, talk to us on slack and we're very responsive.

Um, so with that said, last class, we we stopped here, right.

Um, who can tell us a little bit about what this graph is all about?

What are the what are the rock songs for?

Unless, um, it's the ways in which we can categorize countries based on both their current level of complexity,

as well as what their complexity is or how close that trees are together.

Um, and then categorize it. And it's like, what type of policy that could be potentially useful for that country.

Okay. Anyone else? Like the products which have and you know look.

So how close are how could they process the complexity already.

And they have a high outlook index. They could make move faster. So yeah would be like converting faster than that.

So you don't. So so you're both somewhat right.

Uh because you're talking about the different axes.

So the y axis here is the complexity outlook index which basically tells you how well positioned you are based on the trees,

where you have monkeys today and the trees that are close where you don't.

So how easy it would be to jump to new trees based on your current location in the product space?

Um, so this is, uh, some metric that, uh, can tell you how how likely you are to grow in the extensive margin in the future,

but then the x axis tells you the opposite. It tells you how likely you are to grow in the intensive margin.

So based on the diversification that you already have,

how likely are those industries where you have presence already likely to grow in the intensive margin?

So the x axis is about the intensive and the y axis is about the extensive margin.

And you're going to have to replicate this graph in the problem set.

So, uh, you know, if there's any questions about how this works, um, now's the time or maybe on Friday.

Okay. So so basically if you're well positioned in both dimensions then you're pretty okay.

So, uh, let it be. If you're doing if you're poorly positioned in both dimensions, then it's a you're in troubled waters.

Um, okay. So that's that's kind of where the, where the songs come from.

Um, we are going to have two topics today.

The first one is going to be so Ricardo's hot takes on some, some old questions.

Um, and uh, we're going to be giving you answers to those.

And then the second one is going to be we're going to talk about technological diffusion and the process of how monkeys actually jump in reality.

Um, but for the first topic, um, there's three questions we want you guys to ask to, to to answer.

So please take on just take out your, your cell phones and um, and let's see, uh.

Thank you. Uh. Are you sure you have to?

Yeah, I know. You can.

Is anyone having trouble, uh, registering? Could you just skip it for now?

Okay, let's keep this with you. As you know. So let's take a look.

Okay. Not.

Continuing. Okay. How many responses do you have? Anyone still thinking?

So should countries specialize or diversify?

And we have around a 6040 split trying to become a 5050 split.

I'm not quite making it. Okay.

So it's like majority going for diversify.

Um do you have access to the next question? Yeah.

Do you do you have access to the next question? Do you now?

Yes. Great. Okay.

Okay. Yeah.

Okay. Should you focus on adding value to raw materials?

Yes. That's a very start. Um.

Okay. Um, can we go back to the last slide and maybe get some some people on both sides?

Um, so who thinks we should specialize in a. Oh.

I mean, I don't see the point of producing a product that you are not good at producing.

Okay, you are good at one product or a capital product that you can have value and have like better deals that you should invest in that.

Okay. So it's kind of like a comparative advantage sort of argument where you got to focus on

what you're good at and else you have a difficult range for someone else on specialize.

Uh, I think countries are not countries that are diversified or not diversified for the sake of being diversified,

identified because they are very good on specializing up things.

Um, because of like, for example, having like low cost or like very high skilled people,

they have like a broader range of like pro like a bigger problem space.

So, so what you're saying is very interesting because what you're saying is that you're specialized on having smart, cheap people.

Right. And, and you can use that cheap, smart people to do many things.

And then they, they are. So the country specializes on people, smart people, but cheap.

And then uh, that, that creates, uh, possibility for. Is that what you're saying?

Yeah. Kind of I mean, I mean, like, having, like, a high quality, uh, human capital is one example that,

like, you can have, like, uh, like a lot of capital, for example, not only like labor, uh,

high productivity, like technology, as we have been, like, discussing, um, that like, creates, like,

I mean, the capabilities that can create, like a lot of product, like a lot of leaders, right?

So here you're saying that we don't only care about the letter that is smart to people.

We might also have an advantage in some other letters.

And they go into many words. Yeah. So it's a very interesting answer. Anyone has, uh, something to say on diversifying.

You majority. Okay. Uh, I guess the argument would run.

Um, as the economy changes, the global economy changes, demand for new products will rise and fall,

and you want to have the flexibility to move into different product spaces.

And, uh, having a wide canopy using the forest analogy is helpful with that kind of flexibility that you might need.

So this is more of like a risk management, uh, argument where if you're really good at one thing,

like Paolo said, and you do that and then there's like a global issue in that industry and you're screwed.

Um, so what you're saying is don't put all your eggs in one basket, but that's like, um, that's a more strategic argument.

Uh, the previous two were about like how things endogenously emerge, your arguments,

more about where you want to go strategically and you want to has, uh, different type of arguments for diversifying.

That's not a risk management. You know, I think, um, my initial intuition was to say it depends based on where in the chart it sits.

If the intensive margin is stockpiling, we can go back to.

Yeah. So if you have like if you don't have high like potential to move into more, um,

value adding sectors, you might as well just focus more on the intensive margin.

Whereas, um, if you don't like, if you have a lot of nearby ones where you can actually expand into you,

you might as well diversify because like, current specialization is not not good.

And I said diversify because more countries are likely to be in the latter category versus performer.

Okay. Okay. Very interesting. Anyone else or we can go to the next question before giving any answers to to that question.

Um, we can talk about whether you should add value to your materials.

Who thought no. Who thought no. Here. Yeah.

Uh oh. Yeah. There's me on this statement is the word focus, uh, which, uh, is kind of like normative.

Uh, so I think that to us as, like a policy you should not, like, focus on adding value, uh,

as you like, when you have, like, uh, like repeating for, like, two times, praising one.

And you have a, like, a lot of capabilities, uh, technology.

Then, uh, you will start to, like, build more value on raw materials, rather like, you know,

that you are like pushing towards to that because like, what is important is the property that you have and the cost of like using which.

Okay. So you, you don't like the, um, the state direct thing where people should focus, right?

So the people should focus where they are competitive.

But you can think about this question as you as the firm owner, what should you focus on and why should you diversify?

Should you do products, uh, that are adding value to what you already did?

Why should you do something else? Right? Um, yeah.

What? Produce a more profit stream? Yeah. No, no.

No answers yet. No answers yet it is. And now we are going to give the answers.

And now we're going to have the third question. Okay, good.

Yeah. Okay. So so there's a fairly good consensus.

Oh. Uh, okay.

The next question. The third question. Uh huh. Uh huh.

It's not that you. Just for.

Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. I don't know what they don't know for him.

It's coming. There's a push back. Yeah, but it's gone over and over again.

And. With the.

I guess. Yeah.

Pretty good. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Play classic. Yeah, I mean, it's.

All right, all right. Good. So, yeah.

Countries specialize or diversify.

Should countries focus on adding value to the raw materials and and should countries prioritize producing goods for exports or for their own needs.

Still both in. Okay.

So so good. So we are now in consensus.

Yeah. Um, so so this is, uh, where where do you think this is?

Or could this be. What is this? That's right.

This is a final line, and this is a nice church.

And so on. Where could this be? What did you say in Italy?

No, that's telling on the whole old church there, isn't it?

Okay. It's the same place as where they do this. Oops. Geez.

France runs France. So what is France good at?

She's sampling wine and cheese.

Right. So? So you would expect that, am I correct?

But no. And I get bread.

But you know. But this is so. So you would say, um, France should specialize in making wine and cheese.

Obvious. They're fantastically good at it. Right.

So let's look at what the France's exports.

It's not that they don't export wine and cheese. There's wine and there's cheese.

Okay. But they do a whole lot of other stuff.

Okay. So, um, now why do they do all that other stuff if they should be doing wine and cheese?

They're so good at it. Oh, so the intuition is that the specialization and diversification are really two phenomena seen from two different angles.

It's the same phenomenon seen from two very different angles.

So if you have a group of people and each person in the group specializes.

The group diversifies. So specialization at the individual level leads to diversification at the higher level.

And the question is what is the scale at which this happens.

This idea that you know so. So if you go to a rural medical facility, right, you're going to see a general doctor who knows how to,

I don't know, cure colds, deliver babies, maybe, you know, small fractures and whatever, a narrow set of services.

If you go to a major city hospital, you have people who specialize on lungs and liver and cancer and,

and, um, autoimmune diseases and arthritis and a bunch of other things.

Doctors specialize. The hospital diversifies.

Okay. So the important question is at what level do you think this happens?

And I would put it to you that this happens essentially at the level of a city, happens even below the national level.

So if you're in a city, individuals that specialize, maybe firms specialize.

But the city diversifies. And the country diversifies.

Okay, so. So that's an important intuition that, ehm.

It's the same phenomenon seen from different scales.

And if you're thinking of the national scale or if you're thinking of a city scale.

No. Yes, specialization is great, but it will bring in diversification.

So there's a program in the European Union called Smart Specialization.

And I'm on the record saying that if it's smart, it's not specialization.

Okay. So uh, in but they essentially are trying to apply our framework.

If you want a at the level of a region, uh, or some national level in, in Europe and, and what they're really about is adding something new monkey.

One new monkey to a place doesn't mean that they're going to kill the other monkeys.

In any case, it shouldn't kill the other monkeys. But it's just a question of, you know, can we focus on on something else?

This was very confusing for a while. I think that in the time of, uh, uh, when the Porter group was more active at HBS,

we had somewhat of an intellectual discussion on this because they were saying a little bit, you know, your city should focus on something.

And, and I think that they that they don't say that anymore.

They say that, you know, to the find out some of the clusters that you want to encourage or focus at central,

but not this idea that that they're, you know, uh, a single thing.

And if you want to think of it in terms of Scrabble. Every industry is a word.

It requires letters. But those letters go into many other words.

So you would not expect the city if it has a bunch of letters, to only use them in the context of one word,

you would expect that you know those letters since they go into other words, these adjacencies would have been exploited by somebody.

And it's it's the process, the way it happens. Okay. So number two, should you add value to your raw materials.

Uh, here, um, the answer is going to become a little bit more nuanced.

Yes. Yes, sir. Sorry I just had a question.

Somebody can use specialized if there's no diversity.

Because if you're the only specialized person area where you know there's nothing else, you'll just leave, right?

Uh, you might have migration. So what? I'm just wanting to say you should focus on specializing.

But if you don't have, like, initial diversity and you still, you know, because that's sustainable.

Yeah. You know, sometimes people think of specializing as almost abandoning things and, and, uh, you very seldom see abandonment.

And most of the time you see the intensification, but very you see very, very seldom that people abandon something.

So a I would say for and this is something we're going to discuss in the lecture on remoteness.

For a place to exist, it has to do something and it has to do something exportable, uh, if it is to exist for reasons.

How so? So you'll never find a place that doesn't have anything.

And the question is, what's the next step is, is, is are we going forward?

Hillary. Um, I'm just thinking about, uh, urban concentration and how much this varies between countries and urban concentration.

That means everybody in a single city or.

Yeah, I'm thinking Mexico City, for instance, or London or London.

Yeah. Um, but thinking about, uh, uh,

how many places are still kind of making that it's feasible for many small villages

in many small places to be doing something and wondering if this is like in your,

um, experience with it, is this a matter of these places getting sort of government jobs or industries that don't rely on external

trade and that's kind of subsidized by with the rest of the country is doing or what provides for those jobs.

So, um, this has the flavor of the lecture on remoteness.

And I'm going to talk about remoteness, but you're essentially asking what should a remote small place do?

Or how do they grow? How do they ever grow? Um, how do they continue to exist?

Or how do they continue to exist? And I will. He will pump twice as much because he intuitions.

So in that lecture we're going to marry economic gravity with economic complexity.

And we're going to see where that leads. But right now we don't have too much gravity considerations.

We'll see them later. But the answer to this question am so, so think of a country like Finland.

Okay. Finland is a country with, I don't know, trillions of trees and about 12 people live there.

A couple of million people live there. But it's a big, big country with few people, many trees per capita.

So you would say, you know, you have a comparative advantage in trees, but what the [INAUDIBLE] do you do with trees?

What would you do with trees? Well, you can cut them down and make them into wood, right?

And we're just construction materials, right. Or what would you do with wood?

You should add value to your raw materials because wood is just too simple, right?

What would you do with wood? Chairs.

Well, I'm sorry, but. So, you know, furniture.

What else do you do with wood? So you should know. Uh, more elaborate furniture and value to add value to the table.

Oh, okay. Well, how about paper?

Right. So. Okay, so. So we add value to raw materials.

Okay. But, um, and by the way, if Finland did this.

So. But that's not what got Finland rich, right?

Finland. What got Finland rate is that Finland had a lot of trees.

They had millions of trees per capita. Right. So a lot of trees. Now if you want to cut wood and cut the trees, you're going to need tools.

So you're going to be using tools and equipment and the tools are going to break down and they're going to,

you know, you will have to sharpen them and so on. So eventually you become good at machines and cut tools and cut wood.

Okay. And machines have cut wood from machines that cut wood.

Huh. You move to machines that cut other things, right?

Because not everything needs to be made out of out of wood.

So you need machines to cut other things, right? So maybe.

And for machines that cut other things, maybe you move to automated machines that cut other things,

because cutting everything by hand can be imprecise or it can get boring, right.

So you know everything now. So machines that cut other things.

By the way, this is an automated machine that cuts other things, maybe from automated machines that cut other things.

Maybe you move to automated machines because there's more to life than just cutting, right?

And from automated machines you end up in Nokia.

Okay. So you do things that cut would you do automation on.

No I that cut down on things. You automate the things now that cut and then you abandon cutting and you automate other things and you end up at Nokia.

Right. So this is adding value to your raw materials.

This is adding capabilities to your capabilities that you develop some letters to get here,

some letters to get there, some letters are there to get there.

And every time you add some letters a whole new space opens up.

Okay. By the way, what happened to Nokia is that they could do all these jumps, but they could not jump from cell phones to smartphones.

That was a bridge too far. That actually was a whole set of different letters.

Okay. So the punchline of the story is that when I said, um.

So just to say, you know who exports raw wood? Well, you know, many countries export raw wood.

Okay. Who imports raw? Well, who export stuff made out of wood.

Okay. So these are the exporters of raw wood. These guys don't export things made out of wood.

Right. These are a different set of countries who imports raw wood.

So ehm. The trick of the question was should you focus on adding value to your raw materials?

The operating word was yours, so I had put it just to prompt you in bold and italics.

I don't know if you noticed the subtlety when reading the question.

Okay, but it was involved in italics because the question is, should you focus on adding value to your raw materials?

Right. Why do I say that? Because adding value to raw materials is what all production is about.

All production is about you buy some stuff.

You do something to it, and you hope that the thing that you end up with is worth more than the thing you started with.

That is that you have added value to it, right? So adding value to raw materials is a general thing.

The question is what's so special about your raw materials?

China seems perfectly happy to export, um, wooden furniture using somebody else's wood.

Why should they be limited to using your wood? By the way, Switzerland never got the memo that they happen not to have any cocoa in the Alps, right?

So it didn't stop them from making chocolate, right?

Because you can always if you don't have it, you bring it in.

So almost always the answer should you focus on adding value to your raw materials is no.

Almost always. Not always. And there are very important exceptions that are going to be particularly important when you talk about remote places.

And you'll see why. And so our production involves adding value to your raw material.

But your raw materials are as far as your nearest port. Anything that can be shipped can be shipped to you.

Okay. So if you're focused on adding value to your own raw materials, it must be that for some reason, shipping it to you is very expensive.

Okay, so that's why it will somehow involve economic geography in particularly remote places,

of which, as I'm going to show you in the in the in lecture, Chile is one of the most remote.

Okay. So as they say about us, who can say about Chile what Kissinger said about Argentina?

He said Argentina is a dagger pointed at the heart of Antarctica.

Meaning it doesn't carry its weight in international affairs.

So, yeah, but you can think of it as you're really close to Antarctica.

So for, for you to want to focus on your and now on your raw materials, 2 a.m. conditions must hold.

Um, you're talking about an industry that is very reliant on one single raw material that you happen to have.

So if you're going to make gasoline, you're going to use a [INAUDIBLE] lot of crude oil,

because the fundamental ingredient you put in a refinery is crude oil.

And if you happen to have the control, then you have, you know, one check,

you have one raw material that is dominant in the cost structure of one industry.

Okay. So you can check that. But the second thing A is that it should be cheaper to transport the final gold than it is to transport the raw material.

Because you say, well, I'm in a remote place. I have this locally available raw material.

Okay, so I'm saving the cost of bringing the raw material in.

It's already there, so I don't have to bring it in. I'm far. It would be very expensive for me to bring it in.

Okay. The raw material is already there, but now I need to export the final product.

And since I'm far, I'm going to incur a very high cost of exporting the final product.

So you are in some sense making an arbitrage of how much it costs you to bring the raw materials in and to export the stuff out.

Now two things. First of all, in the case of gasoline, it just so happens that it is cheaper to transport crude oil than it is to transport gasoline.

Because when you transport crude oil, you transport it in bulk, etc.

Once you put it in a refinery, 15 different things come out and these 15 different things have to be in 15 different containers.

So the ships that transport oil products tend to be much smaller and so on, than the mega ships that transport crude oil.

So if you're in a remote place,

putting a refinery is not necessarily going to be economical because transporting the final product is more expensive than transporting the crude oil.

But secondly, as I said before, you need to be talking about an industry that uses only one raw material.

So for example. Indonesia, whereas Indonesia here Indonesia says I have a lot of Nicole.

Nicole. Right. I have a lot of Nicole. I want to make batteries because I have a lot of Nicole.

Well that's fine. I have a lot of nickels. So you save transporting the nickel?

Not that nickel is not expensive to transport.

I'll tell you. You save on transporting the nickel, but a battery has lithium, has, uh, you know, cobalt has this and all that.

So you save on transporting one of them.

What does it do to your overall cost of transport of of, uh, paying for the, um, importation of them, of the raw material?

Okay. Um, you know, transporting a tree is very expensive.

If you cut the tree into pieces. Transporting the pieces is much cheaper.

So you would want to process the the trees near the forest.

You wouldn't want to be transporting cumbersome trees.

You would cut them near the forest. Right. So. So these locational decisions are really an arbitrage on the transportation cost.

Cost. But in general, in a world where, you know, it's becoming increasingly integrated in the message is that, you know,

you may want to focus on adding capabilities or capabilities and not focus on adding value to your raw materials.

The moment you talk about adding value to your raw materials, you are thinking of very few value chains.

When you look at these industries in the product space. Suddenly you realize, oh, I'm good at this.

In other value chains that use other raw materials, they use other things, right?

I may have many of the letters that go into that. So if I'm doing garments, it just so happens that, you know, to do garments you need a port,

you need an industrial zone, you need an urban transport system to for workers to go in and out.

You need relatively efficient customs together, etc.

Right? So you say, gee, in the same industrial zone, with the same port, with the same workers, even that there maybe I can assemble electronics.

Where is any discussion on adding value to raw materials?

So many of the diversification opportunities have to do with the letters that you have.

And the worst that you could make with some additions to your letter.

And these seldom have to do with raw materials.

So in Africa, the discussion is always obsessed by.

In Africa we call it beneficiation and beneficiation, you know, and it's kind of like an almost an element of national pride.

So how could we be exporting cocoa and importing chocolate?

Well, you know, to make chocolate you need sugar, you need milk, you need nuts.

You need other things. You need the machine. You need, you know, reliable electricity.

You need a bunch of other letters. And it's not that so.

And maybe something you can grow into being, but it's not obvious that it is the nearest tree to you.

The fact that Chile is good at mining doesn't mean that Chile is good at mineral processing, right?

And the bulk of mineral processing is done in China.

And that's true for Australia's exports. It's true for Chile's exports.

It's true for Peru's exports. A lot of the processing is done in China and not in them and in the home country.

Yes. I just had a question because when we took the case of No Continent, for example,

and what was interesting is that we're looking for I think it was 25% of GDP.

So it was super concentrated. Um, you know, and okay,

would you say I was just interested that the UK did not spend enough on developing

its own capabilities on this specialization area for because in the end,

this diversification that there's a literature that suggests that then, um, a, you know, Nokia became a monster and had all the talent in Nokia.

When Nokia went under, all that talent was released and and they started innovating and there was a very significant diversification,

thanks to the fact that Nokia released all the talent that they were calling it.

Now next question. Should you focus on on exports or on your people's needs here?

The punch line is. That you are going to produce a very small fraction of your people's needs.

Every place in the world is not self-sufficient.

All places are dependent on things that they want to consume, that they don't make,

and they don't make because they don't know how to make or they don't want to make.

But most places are much more specialized in production than in consumption.

So most places don't make antibiotics, but most places don't make X-ray machines.

Most places don't make cars. Those places don't make, I don't know, TV sets.

So there are many things that you want to have that you don't make.

So I'm talking about a village, about a city, about a state, a province, a country.

Okay. So they want to consume a lot of things that they don't make.

How can you consume something that you don't make you change, you import it.

And how do you pay for your imports? So you have to pay for the things that you want to consume and don't make with

things that you make and don't consume because you sell to somebody who's not here,

you export. Okay. Now, this is just to say that this is in static terms.

This is GDP per capita in exports of goods and services.

You run a regression there and the elasticity is 1.5.

That means that richer places disproportionately export more than poorer places with an elasticity that is greater than one.

Okay. And this is just to show that if you do country fixed effects and year fixed effects, or you take any global,

you know, inflation or increase in prices and any national characteristic elasticity, still something like 1.4.

This one essentially is estimating the elasticity out of individual country growth that on average,

when countries grow, exports grow faster than imports. So growth is in some sense.

Has been export led in the sense that a I'm not talking causality here.

If you're not. I'm saying that when export, when growth happens, exports tend to grow faster than output.

Okay. Secondly. A poor countries tend to be cheap.

Now what you say. What do you mean by poor? Countries tend to be cheap?

One is that, you know, if you go there, you can get a hotel and a restaurant and so on and food and whatever at a lower price.

Right. And that's what goes into the BPP adjustment factor in the purchase purchasing power parity adjustment factor.

And this is the BPP adjustment factor. So it's all based on us is one.

And you see poorer countries are cheaper. There is a dollar in in Middle East.

The North African and lower middle income countries and low income countries is worth $3 now a m and not only that,

but when countries grow, they tend to become more expensive.

This is what they call the Samuelson effect. When you become richer, you become more expensive.

Your BPP adjustment factor defined this way. How much more does a dollar buy in your home than elsewhere?

It goes down. Okay, that's a negative coefficient. So if I asked you why why are poor countries cheap.

Why are poor countries cheap? Yes you can because and labor costs are cheap and therefore all the non-trade animals are cheaper in that country.

Unattainable. How about price? No. Uh huh.

So good. So in where did you learn that?

Yeah. With Franklin. Okay, okay. So it's your fault, not Franklin's fault.

Good. Okay, so the MTA, these have no excuse.

So the idea is that tradable goods have the same price everywhere.

There's the law of one price on tradable goods.

It must be that for some reason, the relative cost of non-tradable is much lower in a poor country than tradable.

That means that a country's poor countries are poor because they have low productivity.

That's why they're poor because they have low productivity.

But. Eight. A.

M. If that were the case, then poor countries should be as expensive as rich countries because they would have low productivity,

compensated by low wages, have low wages, low productivity.

So it would be equally expensive. Except that since they have low productivity, they have low wages,

and all the difference in the countries would be expressed in the differences in the wages.

But.

If we divide production into tradable and non-tradable, then tradable, those are going to be m a m, tradable are going to be a have the same price.

Okay. If if your non-tradable is had the same productivity of your tradable.

They would also have the same price. So what this means is that the reason why poor countries are cheap is because

there's something that keeps a productivity of their tradable particularly low.

They're tradable are super low productivity relative to their own productivity in non-tradable.

So that in some sense you to say the reason why they're cheap is because it costs them so much to generate the dollar.

It's so costly for them to generate the dollar given their low productivity.

Then in exchange for that dollar, you can buy a lot of stuff, all the resources that would have gone into making the dollar.

Okay. So the fact that poor countries are cheap means that the productivity problem is particularly focused in tradable.

So when you look at a poor country, it has not only a low productivity problem, a low productivity problem focused on tradable.

And this is evidence of that. Come in.

Okay, so interestingly enough, countries differ systematically in what it is that they don't do at all.

So for example here I'm giving it a one in the MCP matrix.

These are countries and these are product.

I'm giving it a one if ah if the revealed comparative advantage of that country in that product is greater than 1%.

So 1% is the closest thing I have to zero. Okay.

So if they just make a smidgen and I'll give it a one, and you see that it has this nested structure.

So the poorer countries tend not to not to produce many things.

The rich countries tend to produce everything. So countries tend to produce everything.

And then because of comparative advantage they decide to make more of some less of the others.

But that's all in the internal internal market and not in the external margin.

The poorer countries, the poorer the country, the bigger its extensive margin, the more white it has.

Okay. So they have a particularly undifferentiated thing.

So this is um, these are all the countries in the world.

I should have presented this slide in the previous lecture.

I showed you in a previous lecture that all countries are converging in education and health

and urbanization and female labor force participation in fertility rates and everything.

This is a country's income relative to 1990, relative to the U.S.

And these are the quintiles of country. The the fastest growing quintile grew their income relative to the US by 250%.

Okay by 150%. The U.S. is at one.

They grew to 250. Okay. And and these is the second group.

It marginally improved relative to U.S.

And the other three quintiles fell back.

And we that's what we found that, you know, most countries are falling behind okay.

This is the economic complexity index. But its economic complexity index calculated for the average of these quintiles.

Countries. So the countries that cut off are the countries that narrowed their economic complexity down.

Okay. So it says it's the countries that completed their presence in in them in this MCP matrix.

Right. They they got more ones. They improved their economic complexity.

Right? Yes. Uh, so can you explain what are the quantiles?

Uh, a countries. Yeah. The quantiles are all countries in the world.

Okay. Quintiles. The quintiles are.

So you take all the countries in the world, you you organize them by quintiles of growth.

So the first quintile is the fastest growing quintile. Those are these.

So the fact that these are all very orderly is not magic.

It's by definition they were chosen because they grow at different rates.

But then I calculate the economic complexity for each one of these quintiles.

And through the years these are the same countries in the same quantile or the.

Yeah. You choose them here. Okay. Okay.

Okay. So, um.

So all of this means equipment in general. You should focus on exports.

Uh, even at the village level, the village level, you know, exports might be a different thing.

It might be that you export labor services and they come back as remittances.

Okay. Um, but even at the village level, you want to know what are the activities that happen in the village that can be sold outside of the village?

Okay. So, um. Now.

Um, so eh, exports are going to have a multiplier effect at every scale because exports are going to allow you to not only buy imports,

they're going to allow you to buy non-tradable.

And when you buy a non-tradable, you're buying from somebody local who's going to then get an income and spend it and so on.

So there will be a multiplier effect associated with the non-tradable.

So exports have the addition of having this this effect.

And when when you have the export industry of a town and gets into trouble, the town gets into very serious trouble.

Okay. So for example, this is what happens when a mine closes.

You get a ghost town. And this is what happens when a mine closes.

You get a ghost town. And this is what happens when a mine closes.

You don't get a ghost town, you get a city.

And this is something we're going to see later on in the course or in the class, on on remoteness and so on.

But then maybe the mine allows you to accumulate letters in place, and the accumulation of letters is going to allow you.

To have, um, a, a set of activities that are going to grow thanks to the fact that we have a mine,

if you are able to diversify your tradable enough so that by the time the mine closes,

you have a lot of other tradable activities in town, then the city is going to be able to survive.

But if it was the only tradable activity in town, you're going to get a ghost town.

This is Johannesburg, by the way. So it all got developed because of a mining boom.

San Francisco got developed because of a mining boom. Denver got developed because of a mining boom.

But the mine, the you know, when all those mining booms ended, the city didn't disappear.

There was enough there there to continue. Okay, good.

So. Now, the next question I'm going to tackle is how does know how to move?

Let me let me unless it's very important, let me accelerate because I'm way late.

Okay. How does know how to move. So we know it's hard to put knowhow into brains.

But it's easy to move brains. Now, I wish I had invented that.

Uh, you know, um, bought a history.

Figured it out a long time ago. So. And because history figured it out long time ago, we can see its effects.

This is going to be a major, major driver of human mobility and about.

And technological diffusion. In what sense? You know, as I said before, Malcolm Gladwell says it takes 10,000 hours to get good at something, right?

That's more or less the speed of know how. The speed of airplanes is that you go around the world in a day, right?

In 24 hours, you can go around the world. So moving people is going to be much, much faster than moving knowhow into people.

Okay. And you can see that in, in in the movement of knowhow between firms.

So this is the population of Detroit. And, you know, one day Ford, uh, got started.

Then General Motors got started right next to Ford, and then Chrysler got started right next to General Motors.

And all were in, in in Detroit. And they were in Detroit because earlier Oldsmobile got started in Detroit.

So the knowledge of making cars in Detroit started in Oldsmobile.

And that knowledge moved in Detroit across firms to other competitors.

Okay. And more many times, most of the time, these other firms get started by people who acquired their knowhow in the other firm.

Okay. The same thing.

You know, who knows what Santa Clara County is?

Nobody heard of Santa Clara County because that's not its most popular name.

What's it called these days? Silicon Valley?

Correcto. Mhm. Silicon Valley.

Right. Why? Why? What happened to Silicon Valley? Well, what happened to Silicon Valley?

Is that this guy who was the genius William Shockley,

he was working for AT&T in in Bell Labs and Bell Labs were in a place called Menlo Park, which state?

Menlo Park in Menlo Park, California.

Right. Can you check if there's a menlo Park, California? There is Menlo Park, California.

No. Menlo Park, new Jersey, because that's where Bell Labs were in Menlo Park, new Jersey.

Okay. And in 1956, he got the Nobel Prize for inventing the transistor.

And he left it. He he retired from AT&T and took these eight people,

the treacherous eight and a m he took them to Santa Clara County because he I think he I don't know if he was born there or,

you know, for whatever for very family reasons. And they created Shockley Semiconductors.

But these eight found Shockley to be a [INAUDIBLE]. I can go on.

But he was, uh, I don't know, um, very distrustful, dictatorial, had no funny ideology, was sort of like a Nazi sympathizer or something.

So anyway. But the guys left, and they created Fairchild Semiconductor.

So the eight generate that Fairchild Semiconductors and all these other companies were founded.

Moore is from Moore's Law. He founded all these guys, founded all these other companies.

So the knowledge didn't move, you know, because there's Stanford there.

I know that they say that they are the Harvard of the West, etc., which we take probably right of that there.

But but the point is that them in the knowledge moved from,

from AT&T in new Jersey to California because the people moved and then it moved from Shockley to Fairchild and from Fairchild to Intel and so on.

Not because people see, monkey see, monkey do, etc., that people are imitating each other.

It's because the actual people move from company to company. This is another case of diffusion.

This is garments in in in Bangladesh.

It started with a guy in a with a company that a Korean company, Daewoo,

that wanted to export stuff to Bangladesh and Bangladesh said, you know, we can't buy from you because we don't have dollars.

So if you want me to buy something from you, you have to buy something from me.

And they all went around and suddenly there's nothing I want to buy from you.

You only make jute and and I don't need jute.

So sorry. You know. So. And then we thought that maybe if I were to make an export industry in Bangladesh.

I would be buying the output of that export industry. And with those dollars you will be buying from me.

So I said, okay, I'm going to make a I'm going to make something, an exporting activity.

So they took 126 Bangladeshi workers for a six months training program in Korea.

And they and they and that was 1979. By 1988, 56 of these 126 workers or maybe a little bit more went and create two,

because this is the number of firms they created, 56 companies that were started by the workers trained by this company.

This company didn't do well, but.

In 1980. It was all jute, okay?

And all this green stuff is the garments that grew.

So now garments are 95% of Bangladesh is workers.

And then this is exports by. So the knowhow on how to do a garment industry was injected by dye and then it spread.

It spread them, the people that they trained. And there's a paper buying by this guy here.

Who passed away. Steve a Steven.

I was going to say Kepler.

It's not Kepler, but it has a little bit like her clipper clipper that shows that those 56 companies have an average productivity.

That is three times the average productivity of the industry. So it was really these workers and these companies that's spin off.

Spin off. There's um, a bunch of papers.

This is a paper by by Petra moser.

And she uses in, in areas of chemistry that got a refugee.

From Europe in the 1930s to other areas of chemistry that didn't get a refugee that was specialized in that area of chemistry.

And she looks at the differential growth rate within chemistry, within narrow areas of chemistry,

of the ones that got a refugee and the ones that didn't get a refugee. And she finds enormous effects in terms of the speed of scientific development.

So the, the scientific, um, the reason why the US became a scientific powerhouse is very much related to its ability to attract people.

There's this paper that uses the fact that the H-1b visa is given randomly to look at

the effect of places that got more H-1b visas versus places that got less H-1b visas.

And this book, it looks at, um, it's called the, um, and, uh, the new Argonauts.

Um, it's, uh, it's what happened in Korea and Taiwan, North Korea, Taiwan, India and some other country, eh?

How did these places developed and these places developed?

Because they had I mean, the story in about India is that they had a bunch of people in Silicon Valley with H-1b visas.

H-1b visas are given for three years and you can get it renewed once.

So another three years after six years, either you get a green card or you leave.

So many people get their green cards. Some of them, they didn't get the green card and had to leave.

Those are the ones that originated all the industries that are related intellectually to Silicon Valley in India.

So it's this idea of return migration being a source of this stuff.

And now, um, we are doing this project in, in Moscow, Mexico, and we visited a bunch of plants, the Ford plant there.

This is a plant that does a metal like a harnesses, car harnesses, which is, you know, all the electric wires of a car and put them all together.

And this is, uh, one that does medical equipment. And what impressed us when visiting these plants is that there are no spin offs.

All these companies are multinational corporations.

It's Ford is the only car making company there. They didn't go into Chrysler.

They didn't go into GM. It's just stayed in Ford.

None of people doing wiring and do nobody has spun off like like in in Bangladesh.

So and we um, we, we this is uh, our teaching team here and here in this plant that does that assembles air,

air turbines and, and we're thinking about maybe there's something about market structure,

there's something about barriers to entry and maybe barriers to entry in garments are very low, maybe barriers to entry because of marketing.

These are all B2B products that happen in very concentrated value chains.

So if you leave, it's very unlikely that we're going to get a a big contract with any of the players, etc.

But the point is that not always do you have.

Do you have a ehm spin off spin over spin offs?

So it doesn't always split. So it's, uh, it's an interesting research question for us.

We are still working on it. This is, uh, a place called Franschhoek Valley, South Africa.

Anybody knows what Franschhoek means? No Dutch in the room.

So French hack in in Dutch is French Quarter.

And as you know, South Africa was a Dutch colony and developed this language called Afrikaans, which is really like.

Similar to Dutch means French Quarter and its French Quarter, because this place got populated after the revocation of the Edict of Nant.

Aim got got to aim a bunch of French Huguenots.

There were 400 French Ukrainians that migrated from France to South Africa.

So if I ask you, what does this place produce? It's kind of obvious if you look at the picture.

Well, what did you say? Wine, wine, wine.

So the wine industry developed in South Africa not because they had the right land and whatever.

And so consequently, it sort of naturally grows. Now it grew within this Huguenot community that migrated out of there.

And this leads to this phenomenon.

I talked in the previous lecture on the country, the country space that, you know, two countries might be similar in, in what they produce.

This idea that knowledge moves when people move is probably what's behind this in country space where, you know,

Germany is very similar to Austria, which is very similar to Belgium, which is very similar to the Netherlands,

which is very similar to France, you know, so there's a lot of similarity in what you're good at,

which suggests that you're good at the things that you can learn and you can learn from your neighbor.

Um, in this paper, we this is a static thing.

We showed that if you have a neighbor that is good at something, it increases the probability that you become good at that by 65%.

So there's a very important kind of like geographic dimension to to these innovations.

We have another paper that shows something very interesting in, um with uh, Albanian migrants.

Uh, you know, when, when communism collapsed in Albania, there was a very, very large migration out of Albania into Greece, Italy and elsewhere.

But then Greece in 2011 got into a horrible crisis and all the Albanians lost their jobs in, in, in Greece.

So, uh, they many of them went back and that shock represented in two years an increase in 5% of the labor force of Albania,

suddenly got all these returnees trying to find jobs.

Now, obviously, you know, this is a shock to a supply of labor.

If you move the supply curve, what's going to happen? Well, if wages are flexible, wages are going to come down.

And if wages are not flexible then wages are not going to come down that much.

But unemployment is going to go up. So wages should come down and unemployment should go up.

But what we found out is that unemployment went down and wages went down.

So how the [INAUDIBLE] I mean, you get a shock, a sudden shock in the supply of labor and you don't get what you expect.

And the reason is that the guys who came were not the same guys as the guys you had.

So they came with different letters, and these letters allowed for different things.

I was supposed to have here, um, a greenhouse that was, uh, they learned how to make agriculture with greenhouses in Greece.

They came back with a technology that was particularly suited for the low to small properties that they have in, in, in, in, in Albania.

And as a consequence, you know, this was very positive. We have a similar paper on Mexico that says that when Mexico gets a returnee from the US,

the industry in which that returnee got experience in the U.S. grows in that location in Mexico.

So it's a paper that identifies things at the location industry level and shows spillovers between the U.S.

And that paper was actually made it into the Journal of Urban Economics, which is not bad.

And we found the same things in between East Germany and West Germany.

So there's a there's plenty of evidence of this technological diffusion.

We have a bunch of papers that we did, and we have a picture showing that this happens with business, travel and so on.

So moving people is very important. And you have um, at least these four channels in which you can move technology.

One is migration in the sense that you get people from outside, you know,

56% of the Stem workers of Silicon Valley are foreigners, but the other 46% are not Californians.

Only 18% are Californians. Okay.

So it means that a the secret is not to grow talent, but to attract talent.

Okay. Diasporas can be very important.

I mentioned the case of the Indians in a rise in.

Nonresident Indians and so on. And they asked for us can be very important.

If you have Italians, eh? Then you will have good pizzas.

Yeah, I know if you have, uh, Chinese, you'll have good Chinese restaurants and so on.

So. So you become good at the things that your diaspora knows how to do.

Foreign direct investment is a company that, eh, knows how to do something.

They just don't know if they can do it in your country. Um, and eh, they may bring in some expats for the missing letters, but, you know,

they'll mobilize and then those letters might, might spread and then mergers and acquisitions is the idea that you are here.

You could put lipstick and try to look good to see some if somebody comes.

But alternatively you can just buy a company that that knows how to do something you don't know how to do.

So Google didn't know how to do video streaming, so they bought YouTube something.

They went and developed video streaming. They just bought a company that had that.

And this is something that middle income countries can do. There are documented cases where they have done it, but they haven't.

It hasn't been, uh, theme and something we are pushing, you know, the possibility that if you don't know something, you want to know how to do it.

Now, when we've we've been looking at migration policies, and this is my last point.

And most developing countries have incredibly restrictive migration policies that are biased against high skilled immigration, okay.

They're biased against high skilled immigration. So there's enormous variation in the number of immigrants that societies tolerate.

Yeah.

