[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Other than. If not. And at this, how do we get what you eat?

Well, I mean, obviously.

Yeah, that's. Know.

Because I think. When you live in show, you should have it in a way.

Yeah, yeah. It's cool.

Yeah. That was in a week. It's like. Yeah.

You know, they. Pay for money, you know.

Nobody else knows it. You can take a.

Look at one of the you know. The ones if you go back to.

The villa last time, it's, uh.

You know, and but I know, I. Know they're gonna tell.

You about that. Okay. I mean, just what?

Can I do? You know? Yeah, I know. Uh.

I don't know. Uh. I don't.

Know. Yeah, but that's that's it.

Okay. Go. For that.

I'm sure a lot of the Latin American, but, you know.

Uh, so that I could open. You know what? I need to wait. I'm going to say.

I mean, why am I looking at all the.

University transcripts. Just like you.

Know what? The people who say. You know what I have?

No. We. Can just. Say.

Yeah, it's over time.

We should be focused on, like, actually, can you just like.

Like. Like, is this job?

For you? Yeah. But then. Perhaps I don't.

Right. Good morning everyone.

So let us get started. As usual, some announcements.

So a reminder we have a lecture.

Tomorrow is scheduled in, uh, in the regular slot of the review session.

So? So please be sure that you're aware of this. Uh, next week we will have two review sessions.

The one that we were supposed to have tomorrow on Tuesday. Um, the one that is assigned for next week on Friday.

We will have our lecture on growth in cities on Thursday.

Uh, so keep that in mind. Uh, progressive to do on October 7th and come to office hours if you need help.

Uh, keep an eye on the problem. Sets it like channel in case you need some guidance.

Uh, and just as a reminder, today we have our open house.

So please feel free to come and visit us and get to know us.

So with that, I want to record. All right. Yes.

Yes. I just want to confirm that the Tuesday review session will be in this room, not our regular review session.

Yeah, I mean, the the rooms are reserved for by the day. So not not by the subject.

So, um, anyway, um, so, so today we are going to talk about, um, a, a growth and the energy transition.

And then, uh, you know, if you, I, I did my undergrad graduate degree in applied physics.

So if you talk to a physicist, they say that everything is energy.

So and everything that matters to Bruce has to do with energy.

So. And mass is energy. So in the end everything is energy.

So you want everything to do with energy. Um, I don't have that view.

When you talk about intentional human activities, it goes for intentional human activities.

Uh, there is in the world plenty of energy.

There's gazillions amounts of energy.

What we lack is our ability to figure out how to mobilize that energy.

And over the course of history, there has been a massive increase in the amount of energy that humans use.

But that's mainly because we have figured out ways in which to use energy.

So, you know, when they built the pyramids, they were using mostly human energy, right?

You had slaves carrying heavy stuff and pushing heavy stuff and so on.

Right. Then, you know, they invent that, you know, maybe, maybe, you know, human energy is is not the best form of energy.

If you if you domesticate animals, maybe you can use animal energy and.

Right. And that's, that's or maybe you can use, you know, some energy that's in it's in the water.

It's, you know, you know, the energy that flows or something or you know, the Dutch invented windmills to extract energy from the air and so on.

But eventually we discovered that we can generate, transform heat into motion using the steam engine and so on.

And now suddenly, we could generate energy from mineral resources.

Okay. But it took us, you know, until the end of the 18th century to figure that, okay.

Coal was plenty around then. The oil had been around for millions of years.

It was just we hadn't figured it out. Right.

So, um, once we discovered how to get energy out of mineral things, our use of energy changed dramatically.

Okay. And we suddenly started to use first coal as as the main source of energy and then hydrocarbons.

Um, we used biomass, wood and charcoal for, for the bulk of our, of our existence.

So when you look now at carbon emissions and, you know, getting energy out of burning,

uh, carbon, uh, you know, we used to this is, I mean, this is all of our energy sources.

You see, the amount of energy that we started to mobilize as being has grown.

You know, like, like GDP or faster than GDP. So in essence, you can say, well, you see a the industrial revolution was the energy revolution.

Uh, in some sense it's true. We measure things. How do you measure the power of an engine?

Of course. Horsepower. Horsepower. And we have an engine that has a 250.

The horsepower. And it was meant to be like that. The power of a horse.

So, you know, you have in your car the power of 250 horses or, you know, so, um, so, so we, we, um, we use a whole lot of energy.

And this is the source of our energy. It's coal, it's oil, it's natural gas.

So the natural gas was nothing. And we suddenly discovered that instead of venting it, we can use it.

And instead of just venting, it has an associated thing to natural wall.

We could actually explore for natural gas things that are more pure natural gas.

And now natural gas is displacing a lot of coal. And then we have all these other things up here that are small still and and mostly renewable.

We do find that when you look across country, A, richer countries consume more energy per capita and poorer countries,

because anything you want to do typically uses energy.

Right. So and if you're richer means you're making more things so you're using more energy.

It's not perfectly so because you know there a this this line has some width.

And typically it has to do with some countries are more service intensive which uses less energy.

Some countries are more material intensive, so they use more energy.

And these are all of these things tend to be calculated by production not by use.

So you attribute to China a lot of things that we consume made in China.

But you know, in some sense you could attribute those emissions to to the rest of the world, not not to China.

It is the case. It is the case that the energy intensity of global GDP is falling.

Right. So so per unit of dollars we are consuming less energy.

But you know, this is a fairly slow process because from 160 to 120, it means it has not gone down by a quarter.

But GDP has gone down by has gone up by much more.

So overall, there's been a massive increase in energy use and a massive increase in energy emissions and CO2 emissions.

Okay. So so far so good.

You see that it was here. It was mostly Europe.

Yeah this brown the two Browns or Europe.

And the blue thing is the US.

And then suddenly you started to have a little bit of, of Asia here, which is mostly Japan and stuff and, and sun and nothing in China.

And suddenly China becomes the biggest, the biggest emitter.

Now a global and global emissions.

I mean, climate is going to be impacted by the stock of CO2 in the atmosphere.

So climate is not going to be related to the annual flow of CO2, is going to be related to the stock of CO2.

Okay. The stock of CO2 is the integral of all these curves okay.

Okay. I mean, CO2 supposedly lasts, I don't know, 140 years in the air or something.

So it will take a, you know, there are some depreciation, but the depreciation rate is super low.

And so um, here we look at who has emitted the stock of CO2 that's in the air okay.

And the stock of CO2 that's in the air was emitted 2,724% by the US, 27% in North America, 31% in Europe, you know, 21% in in the EU plus the UK.

Okay. Only 15% in China, only 3% in India.

That's the stock. If you look at sub-Saharan Africa, it's less than 3% of global emissions.

Okay. So that's where we are. So if you ask yourself who caused the problem.

Okay. And you can say, well, you know, if you want to blame game, the US is a quarter of a problem.

A in the EU is a fifth of the problem, etc. but if you look at the emissions today, emissions have been changing very dramatically.

So the integral looks quite different from the flows.

But the flows are the integral of the future. Right.

So if you look at the flows. The US is not 25%.

It's it's 13%, it's less than 14%.

And Im in India is not 3% but 7.6%.

And China is not 15%. It's 30%.

China's by by far the largest emitter in the world today.

So if you want to stop emissions, fine. There is a stock of stuff out there.

But it's going to be very hard unless, you know, you do something about China, you do something about India.

And, you know, it's very hard if you start saying, well, you know, you want to do on the big ones,

you are not considering that the big ones have more people and and you know, the right to emit should be more of per capita, right?

Not per country, not per seat in the UN.

Right. So you'd say, oh, you know, Saint Kitts and Nevis or, and you know, have, have the right to emit because say there are one state.

Well, there are three people living there. So Im here,

I like this graph because this graph is the width of the of the things are the population and the height of the things is the emissions per capita.

So the emissions by country are the area of the rectangle.

So you see that China is the biggest emitter.

But China's emissions are big because China has almost three times the population of the US or four times the population of the US.

But China's emissions are, say, 60% of US emissions per capita.

So in terms of emissions per capita, you know, us is is is is up there among among the most significant.

Saudi Arabia is up there. But I would argue that Saudi Arabia and even Australia, a lot of their emissions are in the things that they export.

So they should be counted, as you know, to the people who import from them.

And the emissions of China are also overstated. For that reason, India is emitting probably a fifth of the US per capita, if not less.

But still, you know, they represent 70% of emissions as well.

And sub-Saharan Africa without South Africa is is this little thing, you know, there's a billion people living there.

They are a, you know, emitting, you know, a fifth of China, a 10th of of of the US.

Yes, a small question. These measures are all about the production that the country runs are really consumption by country.

That's right. Yeah. So, um, so the idea is that climate change is, you know, the traditional perfect externality.

It's a perfect the common pool problem. We share the atmosphere, we share the climate.

The atmosphere doesn't care about who emitted the CO2.

A molecule of CO2 is a molecule of CO2. So this causes this free rider problem that we all want the emissions to come down.

But I'm better off if your emissions come down and mines don't.

So the whole international architecture has been about let's coordinate a reduction in emissions, okay.

Let's coordinate a reduction in emissions.

And in order to coordinate that reduction in emissions, uh, international negotiations have been about four chapters.

Okay. One chapter is national mitigation. So every country should focus on reducing their own emissions.

And there's a lot of work there and there's a lot of efforts there.

And there's a whole mechanism.

Countries announce their nationally determined contributions of what it is that we're going to do to lower their emissions.

Okay. There's adaptation.

Adaptation means the check is in the mail.

No matter what we do, the climate is going to change. It's going to impact you.

What can you do to protect yourself from the impact of the check in the mail?

Okay, there's. A new chapter that they call just transition.

That in the process of of of this mitigation efforts and maybe other patient efforts, people are going to get hurt.

And so the people who work in the coal industry, people who work in the oil industry,

people who work in the in the internal combustion engine car industry, all that are going to get hurt.

And, you know, they cannot be the ones who pay all the costs of just transition.

And because. We all want to forego the use of fossil fuels.

But the problem was caused by those that got rich without forgoing the use of fossil fuels.

Then we need to somehow have the rich countries pay for the mitigation and adaptation in poorer countries.

And that's why we have climate finance. It's called climate finance.

But really it should be focused not on just climate finance, but climate subsidized finance.

Because if you're charging things at the opportunity cost of the market rate, a countries are paying, are paying for, for the transition.

I mean, poor countries or whoever is borrowing is paying for that.

And and if you say and since people cannot borrow infinite amounts and most or have borrowed the amounts that they could potentially borrow,

so the only way they can borrow that money sustainably is by not borrowing money for other things like health, education, infrastructure or whatever.

Right? So unless there is subsidization of climate finance, just just intertemporal substitution in in poorer countries,

but there's no, no rich countries paying for poor countries to forego fossil fuels.

So for any case, ehm, I wrote once an article saying that there's these things that they call a G30 just energy transition programs.

That there's one in India, there's one in Vietnam. There's one in Indonesia, there's one in South Africa.

Ehm. And they always announce the amount of climate finance and, and you know,

and I think in South Africa it was like $9.8 billion or 10 billion or something in that order of magnitude.

But if you decompose, how much of it is commercial loans or from cost loans and how much is subsidy?

It's like 96% commercial loans, 4% subsidy.

So yeah, I say, you know, it's like a guy who says, I'm very generous.

I want to give you a ton of gold.

Except that I don't have a ton of gold. I only have a kilo of gold.

But I want. But a kilo doesn't sound like a tung. Tung sounds like more than a kilo.

Actually. Sounds like a thousand times more than a kilo, right?

So you say, okay, so I'm going to announce and I'm going to give you a ton of a combination of gold and sugar.

And I don't specify the proportion. Right.

So I'm going to give you a ton of gold and sugar. And it's ends up being 996 kilos of sugar and four kilos of gold.

Okay. So anyway, that's the game that's being played. But but this is what's in the tape and this is what climate finance is about.

This is about what the negotiations are about.

And my question is, and by the way, for example, the world Bank creates these country climate and development reports,

CBR, as they call it, and they do one per country and they put dollar amounts.

How much are we going to do? And in mitigation, how much will we do in an adaptation?

How much do we do in just transition? How much will it cost, etc.

So they are putting these reports on. So this is the universe of the transition seen from the point of view of.

The world and then and, and, and um, current negotiations and so on.

And my question is, is this all of it or is this half of it?

Okay. So, uh, this is all about coordinating this common pool problem that we have so that we all focus on lowering our emissions,

and we make it kind of like politically acceptable that each one focuses on lowering our emissions.

And so I want to go small for live here.

And these are the questions. So the question is what is green growth about?

Sorry. Can you? Yeah. Yeah.

Thank you. That's a. So this lecture is on green growth.

Or five. See all of the above.

Well. 36. All right.

Well. At least two thirds of the class is not in agreement with me.

Uh huh. So we would like to reserve the term green growth for none of the above.

None of the above. Okay. Right. None of the above.

Because for the world to lower its emissions, the world is going to need a [INAUDIBLE] lot of stuff that will enable the world to lower its emissions.

Somebody will have to make the things that enable the world to lower its emissions.

The countries that make the things that will enable the world to lower their emissions,

they're going to be involved in the supply of the means of decarbonization.

So it's not about the demand for more decarbonization, convincing people to emit less.

It's about enabling them to emit less by supplying the things that enable decarbonization.

So I like to say ask not what you can do to decarbonize your country.

Ask what you can do to decarbonize the world. Or ask what your country can do to decarbonize the world.

So it's not about you looking in your into your belly button and asking yourself how it is that my country is emitting.

The question is, you look at the world and ask, what will a decarbonizing world need in order to be able to decarbonize?

If I am able to somehow align my country with the needs of a decarbonizing world, the more they decarbonize, the more I sell, the more I grow.

So I'm going to grow because I'm going to align my country with a world that wants to decarbonize.

Okay, now the global decarbonization agenda becomes my engine of growth.

Hilary, I'm just wondering if you think of green growth as only growth in industries that enable the transition.

So, I mean, we're building windmills and all sorts of other things.

Uh, wind turbines. Sorry. And but I'm but I'm thinking about industries that are kind of naturally decoupled from resources as future.

We're going to talk about everything. Okay. So we're going to map out the space of things that are decarbonizing world will need.

And we'll end up with a bunch of alternative ways of exploring and and aligning your country given.

So we will want to know what the world decarbonizing world will need just to tell you where we're going.

What will a decarbonizing world need? Where are those things in the product space?

Where are your monkeys? How far are those trees?

Okay. Um. So as I choose where to move in the product space, I would be useful to move to things that are going to be in very rapid demand,

because there's going to be this theme of investment. And so can we kind of use everything we've learned so far to as a criterion of saying, you know,

in what direction do we want to move in terms of industry promotion, investment attraction and so on?

So, so what does the world need to decarbonize?

Well, the world is going to need a lot of stuff because we are emitting in in many things we

emitting and in energy generation we are making and agriculture and transportation,

manufacturing and construction and so on and heating cooling.

So we're going to need to work on many parts of the economy in the process of decarbonization.

So the current strategy is to electrify everything that can be electrified.

So we want to move from fuels to electricity to the extent possible.

And we want to make that electricity and clean way. So that's one clear strategy out there of what the world would need.

We need to develop. So we want to substitute electricity for fuels.

But it's going to be very hard to substitute for all the fuels.

There are some fuels that are kind of hard to abate because they're hard to electrify.

Okay. And so we will need alternative fuels and we need to eliminate the emissions from manufacturing processes.

And these come a from the fact that a lot of manufacturing processes are happening at very high temperatures.

And it's very hard to achieve very high temperatures with electricity.

It's easier to achieve them with fuels.

So we need those fuels, etc., but also because some of the chemical reactions involved in manufacturing involve a oh, and a reducing things.

Oxidizing means putting oxygen into things and reducing means taking oxygen out of things.

And one cool way to get oxygen out of things is by sending some carbon atoms and having those carbon atoms grab those oxygen atoms and come out.

And so that's what happens when you do cement. That's what happens when you do steel, etc.

Okay. Then we potentially want to capture, use or sequester carbon.

And and all of these things are active areas of technology.

So there's a lot of innovation in this space and so on.

Um, these are some of the industries that have most high energy needs that are typically, um, and harder to operate.

And the higher the temperature, the harder they are to abate.

So in chemicals and refining, in iron and steel and cement, this is a global energy used in, in those, uh, in those industries.

So how can you grow by helping the world decarbonize by supplying the means of decarbonization.

We're going to talk about five strategies, and I'm going to elaborate each strategy.

First strategy is to make the enablers of decarbonization make the tools and equipment that will allow others to decarbonize.

Okay. Second, you want to make green versions of today's great products.

And I'm going to this is going to be a very important theme for some countries.

And we're currently working on them and have worked on some of those countries for which is an important theme strategy.

See is three is capture carbon a we're not big fans of CCS.

We haven't seen any big successes with carbon capture and sequestration, but I'll mention a few things that look more promising.

Four is from a if you know how to do things, you can sell your knowledge.

And yes, uh, quick question why there has not been success in capturing carbon because it's too expensive.

Uh, what our, our use for that? A mainly it's too expensive.

It's, uh, it has not been commercial. So the state of Wyoming has very good resources underground to store the carbon.

And they've developed a field to store the carbon. And they are they have power plants that burn carbon.

Um, they are the major producers of carbon.

They are the largest coal producer in the US.

Um, capturing the carbon in Wyoming, transporting to this place and dumping it doesn't pay for relative to.

Forms of generating that electricity. So they wanted to because they wanted to save their coal industry, but the market is not there.

So and if it's not there in Wyoming, it be hard to be there elsewhere.

And the strategy five is that in order to you to move in that direction, you'll have to acquire some letters.

But once you acquire those letters, you can make words that have nothing to do with decarbonization.

You accumulated those letters because you had a decarbonization theme, but once you have the letter, it can go, in other words, into other words.

So it can be a stepping stone into further diversification that is not directly linked to growth.

Okay. Okay. So let's let's talk about each one of them.

So so we need to produce the enablers of decarbonization.

We need to produce green electricity that involves solar panels wind turbines, transmission line grid scale batteries, inverters a lot of stuff.

You know, stabilizers, you know, there's a lot of stuff that is demanded by the electricity sector in a, you know, to produce green transportation.

We'll need electric vehicles eventually, you know, in their vehicles that use hydrogen and those would use fuel cells.

So you need fuel cells and so on. You need charging stations.

You need hydrogen refueling stations. Now all of these things are going to require a critical minerals.

And the mineral intensity of this strategy is bigger.

So there cannot be a decarbonization a successful decarbonization process without a mining boom.

Now environmentalists love decarbonization.

Environmentalists typically hate mining. And and and so you are in a situation where you cannot save the atmosphere without scratching the earth.

And so that's that's a topic okay.

But there are some products that are going to be in.

If, I mean, when you see one of these projections and you say, okay, in order to achieve the targets by 2030 of the International Energy Agency,

you would need to go from 1000 to 7000 solar power generation equipment per year.

So you say, okay, that means that we need to do a lot of this stuff.

Or you can read this. I think it ain't going to happen.

Okay. So I'm not saying I'm not taking the projections of the IEA as true.

Okay. And probably they're not true. And probably decarbonization will go more slowly than they are assuming.

But E even if it's half of this, there's going to be a boom in capacity generation.

Typically when you have a booming capacity generation, it doesn't happen only through brownfield investments.

Typically, it will require some greenfield investments in greenfield means in a new place that wasn't there before.

And the new place can be your country. So whenever you have these rapidly growing industries, they'll be looking for new places.

Maybe you can give a new place. Okay. So this is for, um, grid scale batteries.

They're minuscule. Will have to go by leaps and bounds by 2030.

If we are going to add variable sources of energy to the electricity grid,

and you want electricity to be able to to to balance supply demand along the day and along the weeks and along the months.

Oh, so you need to store energy. So you need you know.

Oil is not only super dense. And I'm going to talk about that.

It's a it's a storage device. So a tank of oil is stored energy.

But electrons don't store themselves very easily.

If you want to equalize supply and demand, you know the sun shines when it wants and you want.

You want electricity when you want. So storage is going to be so critical.

Minerals are going to be part of the story. These are some of the critical minerals that will be needed in the energy transition.

And these are some of the projections of how much of them will be needed.

Okay. Again, I don't buy any projections, but I just.

Because every time you see these projections, some people say, oh, it's a huge investment opportunity.

And, you know, you can read them by saying decarbonization is going to be slower than we think.

Right. But even if you split the difference, there's has to be a minimum.

And if there is no mining boom, what's going to happen is that the world tries to decarbonize the prices of these minerals,

go up the world price to electrify cars.

So they want there's so many tons of alloy of lithium and nickel and whatever per car.

So the world tries to decarbonize. There is no more lithium and no more nickel.

So the only thing that happens is that the price of lithium and nickel go up.

Right. Until the world doesn't decarbonize, I mean, until, you know,

the demand for decarbonization goes down to the supply of the enablers of decarbonization.

And that's an important message that if you work only on demand and not on supply,

you don't are not very efficient at decarbonizing because you would only make decarbonization more expensive.

Okay. We need a supply side response too.

And green growth is has this positive global externality that it will make the supply side of decarbonization neighbors any more elastic.

Now you might say okay, but but to produce critical minerals I need to have critical minerals.

So the binding constraint on mining is my availability of critical minerals.

Okay. And this graph here tries to say that is [INAUDIBLE].

Okay. These are countries ordered by their proven reserves in lithium.

And the countries with by far the largest reserves of lithium is Bolivia.

They have yet to extract the first ton of lithium. And it's not because they lack lithium, right.

The second one is Argentina. They're barely starting to to take some some lithium out these days.

It's a nascent industry in Argentina. It took them a [INAUDIBLE] of a long time to figure it out.

The second largest producer in the world is Chile.

Even though Chile has, you know, half the reserves of Argentina, a third of the reserves of Bolivia and so on.

So why does Chile produce so much lithium and Bolivia so little lithium?

There's something overground, not something underground.

So the policy has to do with the things overground that allows you to extract those resources.

And the largest producer is Australia, which has, I don't know, a third of the mineral resources of Bolivia, but it's by far the largest producer.

And China produces a [INAUDIBLE] of a lot of lithium, even though they have very, very mineral reserves.

So there's a lot to be done in the policy front.

On the capability front above ground, that is critical for critical minerals.

Yes. Yeah. What's the explanation for the US not taking any lithium out of the ground?

Uh, that's, um, a good question. Lithium out of the ground comes in.

The lithium comes in two forms lithium oxides and lithium carbonate.

And one of them it comes out is in the form of brine.

Brian is a very, very salty water in the Andes.

A this very, very salty water got trapped in the, in the Andean mountain chain when these,

when these mountains came out were formed through tectonic plates and it was trapped in the mountain.

So it takes the form of a liquid. And there's another form of lithium that takes the form of a rock.

Lithium in the form of a rock is much more costly to produce.

Actually, it's the lithium that they have in Australia. But the.

So probably people have figured out that given the international price of lithium,

the international price of lithium was something like 3000, $4,000 for a very long time.

It was only used for these batteries that you put in your cell phones or whatever.

And. Two years ago, it went from to 7000, from 7001 to 7000.

And it's now in the $25,000 range. So for a very long time it was not a very profitable mineral.

But right now, you know, prices have gone up by an order of magnitude.

So they've come down from 70,000 to 20,000 or something like that.

But they're still much, much higher than the history of mining in the US.

Yes, probably. But I mean, that's true for the US, but that's also true for Australia.

So yeah, I think Australians are particularly good at my name and they're particularly good and quick at mining.

Part of the reason is that all their all their minerals are in Western Australia.

8% of Australians live in Western Australia and half of them live in the city of Perth.

So half of us, half of Australia is Western Australia.

So all the mining in Australia is done in godforsaken places where no one lives.

So there's no local opposition. There are no communities there that complain about etc.

So they have a different political economy. Okay.

Um, so there's very different in mining policy, you know, market structures for the different minerals.

Um, you know, South Africa produces 73% of the platinum in the world.

That produces 43% of the chromium in the world, of 38% of the manganese, 40% of the palladium, etc.

So they have. So each country is going to have some possibilities to get into the critical minerals.

Now, the problem with with getting the mining policy right is that countries, they you know,

there's this whole thing about being exploited and and they don't want to be exploited,

they want to extract the maximum amount and so on from, from, uh,

from these exploiting foreign companies that are going to recolonize them and so on and so forth.

So the typical thing is they impose conditions that nobody accepts.

So or they make commitments that are not credible.

And in mining, you know, a typical mine takes ten years to develop.

It takes 20 to 30 years to exploit.

So you are having you're committing to contracts that are extremely long lived and those contracts are extremely long lived.

They're going to have time and consistency, right, that you want to promise everything before they invest.

And once they've sunk all their investment, it's in your interest to expropriate them.

Okay. So it's something people are going to say, I don't trust you.

I don't believe you, I don't invest. So that's in some sense what happens in Bolivia.

I don't think that that's the explanation for the US. That's the explanation of of Bolivia.

And the reason is because you really want to maximize this complicated thing.

You want to maximize the amount of. So this here is the surplus generated by the operation over the course of time.

Okay. That will depend on how much you're going to produce, which itself is a function of this.

And this is always like the tax rate you're the government take or national take.

Okay. So the quantity this is the difference between price and cost.

This is what could be you know this is where the rent is or you know, divided you know, back to net present value by an interest rate.

So if you want to maximize this you want to you want a high P.

That's great. But typically you are a price taker. You want to minimize cost because if you minimize cost there's more rent to be distributed.

Oh, and you want to have the lowest possible interest rate at which people discount things.

But that depends on how risky people think you are. So the riskier you are, the riskier.

If your behavior suggests risk, then there's going to be a less value to be distributed.

The cost of capital will be higher, and so the cost of the operation will be higher, and so on.

So m you don't want to maximize P, you want to maximize this thing and this this thing.

The first derivative if you if you raise t a the first derivative, the partial derivative of that will be positive.

If this is positive right. So you want to raise t. But if you raise t the quantity goes down.

And if. Not obvious that you know T of tall tower of 100 is not going to give you the maximum value.

So you have to make sure that you are not on the wrong side of the Laffer curve.

There's a lot of curve here. So you want to minimize C.

And that has to do with your productive capabilities. How good are you in the in mining operations okay.

Minimize R. That has to do with the risk of operating in your country macroeconomic risk contractual risks, etc.

Regulatory risk. And you want to maximize tau conditional on people investing.

And one way to do that is you become the sexiest places to invest.

You are become the most investor friendly, the most you know, accommodating,

etc. and then you make the private sector compete for the privilege of operating in your country.

But that's kind of like the opposite of the political dynamics, political dynamics, if you want to appear tough and stuff.

And so if you appear very tough, few people show up and only fly by night.

Companies are there, and then they will be able to extract the very low thought from you because, you know, they don't have much competition.

So actually, the intuitions that most people have in terms of how to maximize the value of their mineral resources are just the wrong ones.

Yes. Um, here is if there's like a timing game that some countries are playing with some mineral to say that, yeah, we don't want to extract now,

we want to wait till prices continue to increase and then therefore invest later where it becomes more desirable.

That's great. That's great. But then it'll take you ten years to develop the mine.

So you have long and variable lags here. So if you delay you don't know really how long you're delaying because the alternative is you say,

you know, lithium is great, but you know sodium is heavier but dramatically cheaper.

And there might be no new chemistries of batteries that will substitute sodium for lithium.

And your lithium will stay on the ground. So you also face technological risk.

So you can always, you know, postpone or regulate the speed at which you mine once the mine is there.

But if delaying the development of the mine is a very risky endeavor because, you know, the future is very uncertain.

Yes, yes. I just wanted to add that in.

And so really, um, there's a lot of old sort of mining infrastructure.

And I spoke to a mining engineer there, and they say they cannot recoup their investment in two years.

They don't invest. Um, so their time horizons are extremely short.

Yeah. That's the equivalent of a superhero because they don't trust the government.

The Chinese investors there are there for the long haul.

And I think their strategy is to find different levers of political leverage over the government.

So if the government has a lot of loans to China and so on, there's less likely to screw them over on a on a mining deal.

This is very, very important. This is an issue of why is it that, for example, Chinese investors feel very comfortable investing in Argentina,

which is a country where nobody in his right mind would feel, uh, you know, safe.

But the Chinese investors think, um, China is the biggest buyer of Argentinian soybeans.

So if they mess up with my investment in mining or elsewhere, I can screw them with my purchase of.

So they have leverage. And it's that leverage that that makes them safe.

Right? So that's part of geopolitics and risk.

But so let me tell you what we have done. We have, um, with my coauthors here.

We have taken all of these documents that the US has put out.

And and with natural language processing,

we have identified what are the value chains they talk about and what are the products and the, um, value chains that they imply.

Okay. So we have some textual analysis, natural language processing.

We have backed out. What are the value chains that are behind these technologies okay.

So these are the technologies that so far we have mapped out and we keep on working on it okay.

And a these technologies involve inputs that are not unique to that value chain.

Some of the inputs are going to several value chains.

So this is helping us trying to figure out do you want to make a single bet on electric grids.

Or if you're going to make bets on electric grids, you might make bets on, on, um,

large capacity batteries because they are related or you want to make bets on.

Other things because you'll be developing capabilities, I'd say,

between green hydrogen and large capacity batteries that are shared capabilities and so on that.

So so we're trying to do that. And this is an example of what the value chain in hydrogen looks like.

I'm not optimistic about hydrogen, but I'm just mentioning that there's a lot of excitement about hydrogen.

And now there's a lot of depression about hydrogen about that.

So um, we since we know what these value chains are, we know where they are.

And these are countries that have comparative advantage in, in, in, say, um, green supply chains.

And you have, you know, Germany, the U.S., this is, you know, why this is so light.

This is French Guiana. So it's it's contest France.

But there's, you know, there's some in South Africa, etc. So that's today and we can do it for, you know, fuel cells and green hydrogen.

So even though Chile has a lot of sun, it doesn't have anything about the supply chains.

And this is wind year more in Spain and on wind and so on.

So so what we've tried to do is okay, so now that we know what are the inputs into the supply chains, we can put them in the in the product space.

And this is the product space. These are the places where um, the green products are okay.

For example, this is green hydrogen. This is solar.

This is wind. This is hydropower. This is electric grids.

This is fuel cells and green hydrogen. Carbon capture, etc.

So once that nuclear accident ones that we have that we ask ourselves okay.

Um, our measures that I presented in the last class, how far are your monkeys from these from these trees?

Do they predict your ability to get in?

So does our framework predict your ability to get in?

And and it does. If you know the variable we call how how well surrounded by monkeys is that tree is what we call density.

And here density predicts growth.

And we can divide dividing the density into two density in green products in density in non green products.

And both densities come in. Okay.

So so this says this is validation that the product space has information.

Because where are your monkeys. Where these empty trees has information about you're likely to likelihood to grow in this industry.

Or you likelihood to enter these into space for the monkey to jump towards industry and even for your monkey.

Okay, so so. The general density.

And here we are splitting it between density in green products and in non green products.

They both come in okay. So this is to say we know where these products are.

Some of them at least we have a technique to figure out our potential comparative advantage or implied competitor.

Or how likely are we to succeed. Okay. And we created a dashboard to do this okay.

So this dashboard you'll use in problem set two. Okay.

It will show you a first at the level of value chains.

Which one has monkeys that are closer to value chains.

This is Spain and this is Indonesia I know this is Spain.

So it has a lot of stuff here. This is are you are your monkeys already there.

And this is how strategic it would be for you to, to develop that value chain.

Okay. So here you already have a lot of presence and it would be very strategic for you in.

In uh in in all of these things in Indonesia are things where they don't have any, any comparative advantage.

And they're very strategic. But there is nothing nearby this one.

There is they have some presence, but it's not that strategic and so on.

And we are we are creating a new website that we are going to launch in, in Baku in November for, for the cop meeting.

And it will have a these are going to be the value chains of each one of these things.

And each one of these little circles is the product.

So if you hover on that product tells you what the product is, where you're already there, what's your density, etc., etc.

And then okay, so so that's strategy one.

So strategy one is there's going to be a big shift in demand in the world.

So some of these things are going to be rapidly growing. Which ones of those you do you want to focus on to try to and industrialize.

Yes. Um, in a world where you have a lot of green tariffs being imposed from like US, China on EVs and so on, uh,

isn't this now a kind of dynamic game where something that you might have had a comparative advantage

and suddenly that advantage is eroding because there's lots of expensive tariffs on your product?

Or do you think that and the multilateral level of those things won't really happen?

And maybe at some bilateral level they might cause disruption? Well, I mean, if you you play with the cards are dealt with,

I'm presuming that you don't have the power to change American, European and Chinese policies.

Right? You take them as given. And the question is, do we create opportunities or the dominance opportunity.

So um, there's French ordering. There is China de-risking.

So can you play with those themes?

Okay.

Um, and I would put it to you, that one very important economic puzzle is we don't understand why all the minerals today are being processed in China.

Many countries do mining. All mining countries send their minerals to China for processing.

And then the world says, oh, we are reliant on China for the processing or so many things China is has.

What do you call it in some point? Choke points. Choke points in many areas.

We wish there was more diversification of mineral processing.

Well what does mineral processing take. And you country be one of those.

I mean, China exports 30% copper.

They you know, they have minerals that have 2 or 3% copper.

They refined them to 30% copper. And then they send them to China.

And in China they go from 30% to 99.9% copper.

That means that China is exporting to China 70% garbage.

You'd say, well, why? Why transport garbage if you could transport car, but it hasn't been profitable.

It's not. The Chileans have bought the processing plants in China.

They think it's better to own a processing plant in China than to process in Chile.

But the economics of that is something we don't know.

And I don't know if the market is right or if the market is wrong, or if it's a distortion or if it's an opportunity, I don't know.

I think it's an important question to answer. Now.

Okay, second thing is making things in a green way.

Now this aim has to do with, in with, within a topic that I want to call the end of the energy flat world.

And this is a theme that I've been pushing for the last couple of years.

It's not very intuitive, but it's based on the idea that the world became energetically flat because of oil,

because oil has this unique characteristic that it is amazingly dense, both from a weight point of view and from a volume point of view.

Okay, so from that means a kilo of oil or a liter of oil.

Both have an enormous amount of energy. Okay.

But. In a so for example, hydrogen has much more energy per kilo than oil.

But a kilo of hydrogen is like this room. Right.

But a kilo of oil is this big, right? So now you might say that's a very interesting physical chemical property.

Who the [INAUDIBLE] cares? Well, you care because behind this density is the cost of transportation.

And the cost of transporting oil is ridiculously low.

If a barrel of oil costs $80 in Saudi Arabia, it will cost $82.

In Japan, $82 in Rotterdam. Kind of like the cost of transportation is insignificant relative to the cost of energy.

And that means that everywhere in the world, people face the same cost of energy.

That means that the local availability of energy was not an important determinant of comparative advantage.

So energy was not an important determinant of competitive advantage because energy you can transport this way.

And as a consequence it means that energy intensive products today, like steel are producing countries that are energy poor.

It's not that you make steel because you have a lot of energy. You make steel because you make steel.

And since steel needs energy, you bring in the energy. These are the exporters of steel.

These are the importers of oil who export steel. China, South Korea, Japan, Germany, Belgium.

Who imports oil? China, Japan, South Korea, Germany, Belgium.

You know. So they export the steel. They import the energy that goes into making the steel.

Now that's a flat world, eh?

These products are very energy intensive. This is their energy intensity.

Now to. The red this countries are countries that import energy.

And the continent that is most energy dependent or energy importing is Europe.

In Japan, South Korea and are highly import dependent.

Okay. And these are the countries with energy surpluses a countries that export energy okay.

But export fossil fuels. And what these graphs show is that if you look at countries in terms of are they energy rich or energy poor,

there's no correlation between being energy rich or energy poor and being and having a competitive advantage in energy intensive products.

The world has been flat, but we argue that the world is not going to be like that.

The world is going to be more like this. You know.

If you put a solar panel in the Atacama Desert of Chile, okay, you will generate a megawatt hour of energy for less than $20.

Okay. $20 a megawatt hour of energy is $32 a barrel of oil equivalent.

So you can generate energy at a fraction of the price of oil.

Okay. If you want to transport that energy, well, you have to transform that energy into hydrogen.

The price of gray hydrogen is a dollar a kilo.

The price of the cost of green hydrogen. Trying to bring it down to $4 a kilo.

The U.S. gives you a subsidy of $3 a kilo if you make hydrogen.

Assuming that you're going to, you know, $1 is your competition plus your subsidy $3.

It will tolerate the cost of $4. $4 a kilo is $220 a barrel of oil equivalent.

So you start with electricity. That's at $20.

I say at $32 a barrel of oil. You try to transport it in the process of changing it so that you can transport.

It goes from $30 to $220. And that's just the cost of transforming it to hydrogen, not even to ammonia, and not even to ship it and so on.

So energy becomes essentially our non-tradable green energy has a lot of non-tradable characteristics.

Use it or lose it. And.

The world has a little bit of a flavor of what this means by the difference between oil and natural gas.

Natural gas. It is very energy intensive and intense.

Per kilo, but not per unit of volume at room temperature and room pressure.

Uh, you know, natural gas has no energy. If you want to.

You have to liquefy it, and you lose almost half of the energy in the natural gas.

You use almost half of the energy in the natural gas to liquefied natural gas.

So this is up in the US. If you want natural gas, you pay $2 a million BTUs.

If you want LNG, you pay $8. Okay, so transporting it becomes much more expensive.

And as a consequence you don't move LNG.

The way you move oil in these big ships, you move LNG and these cryogenics stuff, right?

You know, and as a consequence LNG is not as transportable as oil.

And as a consequence there's no law of one price in LNG there.

Humongous differences in price in different. This is Alberta.

This is Henry Hub in the US. This is Japan Korea.

These are differences in natural gas prices in different parts of the world.

So having locally available natural gas is a comparative advantage in the way that having

locally available oil is not a comparative advantage because of these transportation.

And this is just, uh, a little flavor of what's coming, because green energy is much harder to transport than hydrogen, than than natural gas.

And this is what generated the energy crisis in, in Europe.

The because of the war in Ukraine, they got shut out of their natural gas sources.

And and you know, there's that's why. And Germany is in recession and so on.

With hydrogen, it's going to be that much more difficult.

So the world is going to resemble more of the world of the past, which is that you put the manufacturing capacity next to the source of energy, right?

You put it right on, on the dime.

So you want to put the manufacturing capacity closer to the sources of green energy, and which is, by the way, the way the Dutch did it.

You know, a, a windmill is a manufacturing plant that's in the windmill that uses as its source of energy the windmill.

But these things are used to ground flour, to cut wood, etc., etc. these are manufacturing plants if you want.

And this is what happens in in Norway and in Iceland.

They are putting these energy intensive industries right next to hydro capacity.

The question is is this a theme for the future? It's important because the green sources of energy are located where they are.

This is hydropower. This is solar.

There's a lot of solar here, right? There's a lot of solar here in Namibia, in Morocco where we're working.

Right. There's a lot of solar in the Gulf, and this is wind.

So if either you use it there or it's going to be very hard to move.

So the question is, can we use that as an excuse to bring capacity to these areas.

Can we sort of like if the world will have to relocate its industrial capacity towards places that have green energy?

There's Germany is not going to import green energy.

It's too expensive. German companies that use a lot of energy will have to move to where the green energy is, and that's an investment theme.

Can we use it in our growth strategies? That strategy to care about the cost of that green energy depends on a the cost of capital.

And the cost of capital tends to be very high in developing countries.

So you have to figure out what you can do about the cost of capital. Yes.

I was wondering about, uh, you didn't mention the energy because it's not so location dependent, right?

Yeah, that is correct. The moment that nuclear energy becomes, ehm, commercially competitive, we'll be in a different ballgame and there's.

You know, a lot of work in, in small modular reactors.

But today nuclear energy is not competitive.

So a a there's going to be for the next few decades an advantage of, of being able to use this cheap energy world with existing technologies.

Eventually nuclear energy could become cheaper.

But we are nowhere there right now. There's nothing that is that competes.

So one of the themes that we have been pushing is the idea of green industrial parks.

That is, you know, you could not only decarbonize yourself fully,

but you can develop resources not because you want to decarbonize yourself, but because you want to decarbonize the world.

You want to develop your green resources and tell the world if you want to produce without, without with a smaller carbon footprint, come here.

Plug yourself here. Here the energy is green.

So I'm not doing this because I want to decarbonize myself.

I'm doing this because I want to decarbonize the world. Okay.

So so this is the idea of green industrial parks that I want you to to think about.

Anyway, in carbon capture. Um, there's I don't have too much time.

I'll just say that nature based solutions typically don't have not been working,

and that carbon capture has not been economical, but that biofuels look very promising for many countries in the tropics.

Um, this is, uh, the different prices for carbon for a ton of CO2 in different parts of the world.

This is a price. If there was an efficient market, there will be a single world price.

And, you know, whoever is able to capture carbon at the lower price would sell those carbon captures, and that would be the industry.

But right now you have these humongous differences in carbon prices across the world.

It would make sense for Switzerland to capture carbon in Colombia.

Here's Colombia, but there's no way to trade that.

And and the Colombians don't want to trade it.

And there's no way to certify these things because in in these nature based solutions that people are developing,

it's not obvious that there is additionality and the things that are being sold, there's not it's not obvious that there's permanence.

For example, you can capture carbon by reforestation,

but eventually the forests are going to burn down and the carbon is going to go back into the air.

So you don't know the permanence. And finally, measurement is a big problem.

And this has led to a crisis of greenwashing, where, you know,

this whole area has has gone through a boom and now bust because it's it's all belonging anyway.

A carbon capture, uh, use storage. There's been very little done.

A we seen a project in South Africa that capture CO2 from a steel plant, uh, and then mixes the CO2 with green hydrogen to make green fuels.

They're not completely green fuels because they start with CO2.

But the CO2 that you're using is a CO2 that comes from a plant that was burning coal.

So it's kind of like you get to use the CO2 in the coal twice, you use it when you use the coal, and then you use it when you use the green.

Okay. But you need a source of carbon to make to make hydrocarbons, okay.

And you can mix the hydrogen with, uh, with that source of carbon to make the hydrocarbon.

But but what's your source of CO2? That's the only project we've seen.

And then there's, um, there's a looming project that I told you is not going very far.

And then there's biofuels that I think are very interesting because, ehm, it's simply to transform biomass into fuels.

And right now we have two technologies that use one uses sugar, uh, to make bio to buy ethanol and one uses, uh, corn to make ethanol.

But that uses the part of the the plant that you eat.

So there's kind of like a competition between food and fuel, but there's all the other biomass that you don't eat.

So if you have a use for that biomass, then it doesn't compete with your food, right?

So imagine that you use the corn, the part that you eat, you eat, and the rest you process to make a fuel.

In that case, you know, that may even lower the price of food because you know, you increase the value of of the stuff you don't eat.

Okay. And there's, um, a technology to do that that is called pyrolysis that I think is going to be something interesting to explore.

It's just you put the biomass at high temperature without oxygen so it doesn't burn and gets transformed into a hydrocarbon.

And you can regulate how much of it is coal.

You can generate the coal that they call bio char or you generate the fuel.

Okay. So anyway and then you can a strategy for is you export your knowledge.

Um, you know the first ones to develop say large solar PV solar fields or large windmills or

large electric grids that use both are the first that are going to learn how to do it.

And now that you know how to do it, that's an asset.

Now you can sell that knowledge and you can sell that knowledge in the form of engineering, procurement and construction services.

So whenever somebody wants to install something, they'll call you or you do the the engineering, the procurement, the construction and so on.

And so you're selling those, those services. And that's what happened with wind in Nevada.

Nevada was a first mover in in windmills.

As a consequence,

they attracted Siemens Gamesa as the second largest manufacturer of wind turbines because they were developing the wind turbines for themselves.

And they have a large market share in wind farm engineering.

So that's their export. So it's not that they have wind. No, no.

What they have is wind knowledge okay. And that's something we're trying to you know, we're working with Morocco.

Morocco is developing this green hydrogen project, large green hydrogen project.

To do that they have to develop their solar or wind, hydrogen, etc.

So they are trying to contract all of these things with an engineering company that they over.

Um, so in the process of doing it, they learn how to do it better.

And then they have the engineering company to sell the service. Okay.

And then finally, you know, the idea is that, you know, we started with this graph.

And so you think of of this being the green growth graph.

No. But now that you have all of these letters.

