[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
I usually go at night.

I do not feel like, you know, for two, which.

I don't work for the government.

That creates what we like. Having small appointment volume.

So that, you know, we didn't get the last minute.

Right? Uh, this email. Okay. Okay.

Uh, I think the not right, and I didn't. Know.

What he was like. Oh, well.

Uh, yeah. Yeah, I guess the mindset is at some point.

Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that news that you don't have a choice.

Between that and. I was right.

First of all the time, I do. I do know that you went to Harvard and you know how much know my stuff.

That's that's nice. Are you going to say yes, I was.

Like. Yes.

I think. Yeah.

The best part about this, you know, it's like you say, it's like you said I was going to go.

To school. Okay.

This is this is a brand new lecture.

So the first time I, I teach on this subject.

But you'll see why. It's kind of obvious.

You know, the growth lab has been working mostly, uh, for a long time with national governments and the state governments.

And then we started to work with city governments. We started in Buenos Aires.

We only put them up here and then to a bunch of other cities.

So, um, a and the question you would ask yourself is, you know,

what's the difference about growth in countries and growth in cities, countries and states and cities?

What how would you need to adjust your mental framework to understand these phenomena?

Okay, so before we do that, some housekeeping, you want to tell us you're still eight students without a group?

Yeah. Um, so try to match this lecture is kind of about matching so that um,

and feel free to talk to you in slack or you or to write your name and your interest in the worksheet,

uh, so that we can help you guys start working on problem set two is due October 7th.

October 7th is next. Um, yeah, it's next Monday.

So, um, you know, if you haven't started yet, start said.

And if you have a lot of questions, which will you will, uh, you slack or write me.

That can join the slack. Okay.

So so we know a few things about, um, about growth.

We thought that growth is a growth of knowledge. And knowledge takes to be forms and body knowledge and tools.

Codified knowledge includes recipes, formulas, algorithms and pass it knowledge or know how in brains know how behaves like letters of Scrabble.

It is that there are genius and combinatorial. Different words require different letters.

It is what makes knowledge hard to diffuse, right?

The tools and codes are easy to move around but know how. It's not.

Production possibilities grow up combinatorial with a number of capabilities a country has or a place has,

and poor countries are poor because they have few capabilities.

And, you know, low development means few lenders and development means the accumulation of letters.

Okay. And poor countries stay poor because they have no incentives to acquire new letters.

And that has to do with this convexity and the relationship between what fraction

of the alphabet you have and what fraction of the dictionary you can write.

Okay. Now when.

You look at a global development, okay.

You think of it sort of like in these terms is that, you know, some countries are rich and other countries are.

Right. But if you actually look at the world, it looks more like this, right?

That you don't see borders there, but you see a lot of structure.

Right. And this structure is the consequence of the fact that economic activity tends to concentrate enormously in space.

Okay, so something is causing a economic activity to concentrate in space.

And a, you know, if you look at the concentration of economic activity in the U.S., this is the way it looks, right?

It's extremely concentrated in space. It's not the it's not you know, the U.S. is homogeneously whatever or.

No, it's a it's a bunch of of agglomeration.

So why do people want to gather together and why what is this centripetal force that,

that instead of people wanting to spread out, they want to, uh, to join together.

And we have a theory for that and the theory for that. Is this right that.

If this is the fraction of the alphabet you have, and this is the fraction of a dictionary you can write as presented this in the past, right, right.

That if words are very short, like one letter long,

there's a very linear relationship between how many letters you have and how many words you can put together.

Know one letter, one word, ten letters, ten words. But if words are long, say ten letters long with five letters, you make nothing.

With nine letters you make nothing with ten letters. Maybe you can make one, but with 11 letters you can make 11, and so on.

So it. When we try to estimate what is the nature of the world we live in, it tends to look like this.

And this means that if you have a moderate number of letters, you get very little.

Or if you have a lot of letters, you get a lot. And any extra letter here pays a lot.

Here an extra letter pays very little. Okay.

So that's that's the force that's causing these agglomerations.

Okay. Good. So if you want, uh, symphonic orchestra, you better not locate in a small town.

Right. Because there won't be the variety of skills that the symphony orchestra will need.

So complex production will need to locate in, in deeper, deeper markets.

So that's why you get structures like this. The metropolitan area of Tokyo has 37.1 million people.

Right. And if you look at it in Tokyo, in the in the industry space, they're all over it all.

So they're super diversified in industry space.

Now, if we apply the Economic Complexity Index, a what we find is that in a, you know,

complex places have a lot of population and less complex places have less population.

And that complex places have, on average, higher wages.

And the highest one here is in Silicon Valley.

These are Silicon Valley. And, well, if you want to feel proud that you.

Know many activities, only locate in very large towns or tend to locate more complex activities tend to locate in very large towns,

while other activities like mining tend to locate mostly in smaller towns right in mining towns.

Okay. Now in. There are a set of a.

Issues that are. Uh, have been elucidated by my, you know, work with a complexity paradigm.

So this is work by Frank nephew. Frank nephew. It was for many years the academic director of the growth Lab.

He's now, um, a professor at the, uh, complexity Science hub in at the University of Vienna.

And he's now co-chairing our growth colab in Vienna.

Sorry, bro. Flap has metastasized into Vienna and London, and so.

So, um, he was wondering, why is it that, um, um, you know, large places pay higher wages.

Okay. And the question of what allows them to pay higher wages, why can they pay higher wages?

And and the argument is that so what he did is he got a data set of Swedish workers and that data set,

he had a very detailed classification of the education of each worker, like in 700 different categories.

And then he had the social security data, which means employer employee match data set.

So he knew in every firm all the workers and the education of all the workers.

And the question he was asking is, can we observe complementarities?

For example, if an anesthesiologist works alone, he's not much better than a bad lecturer.

[INAUDIBLE] put you to sleep, right? But, uh, anesthesiologist.

Working with a surgeon is a different story, right?

And a surgeon without an anesthesiologist. It's not a very pleasant experience.

Right. So, a these complementarities mean that you get a lot of payoff if you work with somebody that complements your knowledge that,

you know, you make it into a good syllable, right? That intuition.

And he went into measuring a, a the, the complementarity between two occupations.

Call that like distance in complexity. Right.

And then the complementarity between a worker and not another occupation, but between a worker and the whole rest of the firm.

And he developed measures of complementarity, that is, two people who study different things but tend to work together versus substitute ability,

which is people who studied formally different things but typically perform the same occupation.

Yes. Uh, the difference in wages between large cities and smaller cities cannot be explained by the classic, uh, assumptions.

Uh, elaborate on mean. And that's a Samuelson.

Yeah. You have, like you say, like wages in one city could be like higher than in city.

And. Yeah. So, so some of the non-tradable goods in a.

Well you would still have to explain why tradable good trade the tradable industries pay higher wages.

So what would allow the tradable industry to pay higher wages.

Now the tradable industry would locate a level of employment where the wage is equal to the marginal product of labor.

So if they're paying higher wages, they have higher marginal products of labor.

So here I'm going to ask the question why the [INAUDIBLE] would they have higher marginal product rates.

What allows them to pay higher wages. Okay. And and and so so he's going to have measures of how complementary is a worker to each firm.

Okay. So how come so am I the anesthesiologist that is missing in this medical team.

Okay. Versus. This team is full of anesthesiologists and I'm one more honest astrology.

So I have a lot of substitutes in that team. So complements are people who study different things but tend to work together.

Substitutes are people who study different things but tend to work in the same occupation.

Okay. And he finds that if you work, if you are more of a substitute to other people in the firm, you tend to earn less.

If you're more of a complement to people in the firm, you tend to earn more.

Now the point is. That in, in the more um in the more complement complementary you are to the workers, the higher the urban wage premium.

So what happens is that larger cities allow for, in some sense better matches,

better complementarities, because you have more options to put people together.

So you end up with more complementary teams.

And that complementarity explains a good chunk of this urban wage premium.

Yeah. Okay. So so this is complementarity in size.

Larger cities allow for greater complementarity and greater complementarity allows for higher wages okay.

And he also has this very beautiful graph where he divides people by an educational level.

So that's these are the educational levels 123456 okay.

So these are PhDs college postsecondary etc.

Okay. And then within that educational category he divides people into five quintiles.

In terms of how complementary they are to other people.

Okay. And what this says is that complementarity doesn't help much at the lower levels of education, but at the higher levels of education,

you know, if you end up working in teams that are not very complementary, you get nothing relative to secondary education.

But if you work in teams of highly complementary, then you get along okay.

So those returns to education are very dependent on how complementary you end up.

Your job ends up ends up being relative to others. Okay.

So so this suggests that, you know, if you're a letter, you know, very educated letter,

if you find an ability to participate in a very long word, then your letter is super valuable.

But if you end up participating in a very short word, you know you're not that complimentary.

You don't get that much of a payoff. So these complementarities of letters are key to kind of like the magic of agglomeration economies.

So so what makes cities productive and larger cities more productive is the possibility of sharing,

the possibility of matching and the possibility of learning.

Okay. And I'm going to elaborate each one of them.

Okay. So cities in terms of sharing cities allow for concentrated public goods provision.

So you know, you have a larger city provide public goods.

More people can benefit from public goods. Okay. So it's easier to provide public goods cheaper per capita.

Yeah. And if there are non-tradable inputs.

You know, we've argued that not a non-tradable are a very important determinant of things,

where things can locate if you require an input and it cannot be brought from outside.

Then either you make it locally or the industries that rely on that input cannot exist.

Okay. And and urban amenities you share.

You know, you share the Boston Commons, you share the Charles River, you share, you know, the Museum of Art, etc.

Okay. So so you share public goods.

You share private goods like a greater division of labor, a more diverse workers,

greater availability of intermediate private inputs, you know, more, uh, risk sharing.

It's a more diversified economy. So you share more things matching.

Well, you can match workers to jobs.

Um, a lot of the literature just thinks that there's, you know, vacancies here and workers here, and, and the quality of the match goes up.

If you have a larger pool with which through which to match.

I like to think that it's not just matching existing vacancies,

but that the possibility of firms being more complex depends on the labor force being more diverse.

So you can achieve these these better matches, um, matching suppliers and customers.

And one of the founding is seminal papers in this literature.

You know, states this an increase in the number of agents trying to match improve the expected quality of each match.

Right. If you are if you're working in a village where there's only one vacancy and you take that job,

the likelihood that that vacancy is close to your skill set is going to be very low.

The bigger the number of vacancies in some heterogeneous space, the better the match.

And then finally there is learning. Uh, imitation is easier at closer distance on the job.

Learning is easier. You know, the more a diversity of jobs are available, you cannot have experience in industries that don't exist.

If in a city there are many different kinds of industries, there are many different kinds of on the job learning that you can acquire.

And worker mobility is easier at close distance because if you lose your job,

you know, it would be great if to get another job, you don't have to move home.

You don't have to move your kids from school. Right?

So you would really want to have kind of opportunities relatively close to you.

Those are going to be much more abundant in a larger city than in a smaller city.

And then there's a possibility of knowledge generation, right, that you can, um,

combine, um, you know, the idea that that products are new combinations of ideas that,

you know, a bicycle is, is, um, you know, is a wheel combined with a paddle combine with a chain combine.

So it's a combination of ideas, and cities have more ideas that can be combined.

So it should be innovation tends to also be very skewed towards very large places.

Okay. Good. So.

Um, so why do people want to live together?

You know, a I don't know if I in last Friday's lecture, I talked about public goods in the metaphor I did not use, I think I forgot, um,

is that, you know, production requires public goods, and private goods, and public private goods have the invisible hand of the market.

Public goods doesn't have the invisible hand of the market. They have to be provided by governments.

But the governments don't possess a the thing that the market provides and the market provides information, incentives and resource mobilization.

Right.

The market provides information through the price system, provides incentive through the profit motive, which is just a calculation on prices, right?

The price of inputs, the price of the output minus the price of the inputs.

Right. Um, but it's not just a calculation. It's an incentive.

Right. Because you get to pocket the money. And capital markets,

financial markets tried to give money to those that are expected to be profitable

because they are seen as correctly responding to the information that is in prices.

So public goods, the problem is that they have no price, so no information about what's.

No profit motive, so no incentive to particularly respond to information even if you had it.

And no decentralized capital markets allocating resources.

You have centralized budgets and so on. So because of that, public goods are an issue.

No, I'm supplying the right combination of public goods is a challenge.

And that's that's why many times the constraints to growth have something to do with public goods.

The metaphor I did not use is the idea that private goods are like continents, and public goods are like vowels,

and every word tends to have consonants and vowels, except maybe in Polish, where it's all consonants.

Yeah. So, um, so you are you to make long words, you need many consonants or a great variety, say,

of workers and so on, many vowels, many different kinds of public goods and public amenities.

So cities, large cities are going to allow people to participate in more complex in production.

Okay. So so now we have kind of married an understanding of the city with our complexity framework.

Okay. Now, you might ask yourself, what determines the size of a city?

And I'm here. What I'm going to argue is that, um.

You know, when you think of balance of payments, you think of countries, right?

And it all ends up being, you know, the balance of payments ends up.

Balancing with changes in international reserves at the central bank.

Right. And so you think it's a typically national measure.

I'm going to put it to you that you can do the balance of payments at any scale you want,

at the scale of a neighborhood that the scale of a village at the scale of a town, Cynthia, etc.

But every city wants to consume things it does not make.

All cities are incomplete in terms of being able to produce what they want to consume.

Most cities don't produce cars. Most most cities don't produce antibiotics.

Most cities don't produce x ray machines. But all cities want to have cars, antibiotics, and x ray machines.

Right. So if it needs to import the things it doesn't make and it needs to pay for those imports with some money it got from outside, right.

So it needs to bring money in in order to be able to pay for the things that it wants to bring in.

Okay. So it needs to export in order to import. Okay.

So the size of a city is proportional to the size of its export sector.

Now notice that I'm putting exports in quotation marks.

Because what I mean by export is things that I can do here and sell outside of here.

It doesn't mean that it has to cross a border, right?

So I make it in Bogota and it doesn't have to go to Miami.

It can go to key, I can go to margin. It can go anywhere outside of a city.

It's going to be bringing money into a city. Okay. So if your export sector gets in trouble.

And here again this is Detroit. So Detroit had a boom in its export industry which was cars right.

And when the export industry gets into trouble Detroit gets into trouble.

And it ends up looking like this. Oh. So.

So the size of a city is proportional to the size of its export sector.

So in some sense, a city is a much more open economy than a country.

There's much more quote unquote, international trade in a sense, than a country.

Now cities can only import tradable. They cannot import non-tradable because by definition, non-tradable cannot be moved.

Right. So, you know, under existing technologies, A, the barber needs to be sufficiently close to the hair to be able to cut it.

Right. You cannot cut hair at the distance. Right. So, um.

So the city can import all the tradable.

It is unable to make. But it needs to make all the non-tradable that it needs.

Okay. Now the foreign customer of your trade, Ables is somebody who's not here.

So if you're wanted to sell a hot espresso in stock in Starbucks.

You cannot be too far from the customer. That's why there are so many Starbucks.

There's not that there's a Starbucks in the Boston area.

There's a Starbucks in every other block.

Right? So if you're selling to somebody in Ohio.

Presumably that person in Ohio is not forced to buy from you.

They could buy from some other supplier. But maybe if you live, you know, if you're here, maybe you only have one Starbucks nearby.

So if you are in the non-tradable sector, you're kind of like you have market power over your local guys because they don't have too many options.

But if you're selling in Ohio. You know, anybody could be selling in Ohio, right?

So tradable are going to face much more competition.

Yes. Hillary, I'm just wondering, in the United States, are most, um,

towns that are really remote, made up primarily of like government jobs and non-tradable?

Um. I want to delay the detailed answer to a question to the next lecture on remoteness.

So what? So you'll need to have and I'll, I'll deal with that in a couple of slides actually.

I'll deal with that in a couple of slides. So what what what makes.

So how do remote places exist or how do very small places exist?

Because by this logic, they shouldn't exist. Or how do they survive? Yeah.

Um, so the point is that your tradable sector needs to be competitive.

Like, for example, the thing that killed Detroit was the fact that not only BMW and Toyota could sell cars in the US,

but that they could make the cars more cheaply in South Carolina.

So and part of it is was the loss of, you know, American made cars,

but also the loss of Detroit make cars because some other places in the US started to make cars.

So your exports need to be competitive. So your city has to be particularly good at some things.

Right. So your your tradable sector is much more vulnerable.

Okay. And it's a complement of your non-tradable.

But it's probably the hard one to get. Also it's very rare that you are particularly good at tradable and bad.

And non-tradable tradable is are harder to survive.

Okay. So historically, many towns got started because some locational advantage justified people to move there.

So Johannesburg in San Francisco, Denver started because it was a mining boom.

They discovered a mine and people started to move there because of the mine and then because of the mine,

there were workers, because there were workers. They had needs.

They needed food, they needed, housing, they needed, etc. And so a bunch of other letters gathered.

Okay.

And so in Buenos Aires, it was, you know, it was a port city next to, you know, the the most fertile land in, in the world, apparently in the Pampa.

So, eh, so, you know, the city grew because it had that locational advantage, by the way.

It's an interesting point that in Argentina was one of the most the least populated countries in the Americas.

It was super unpopulated until the 1850s, 1860s, 1870s when, you know, Mexico had millions of people, Peru had millions of people.

The Indians were not able to kind of survive in Argentina.

They they prefer to live at 4000m high in Bolivia.

But also, you know, but but not in Argentina, when the Pampa is the most fertile land in the world.

Why the [INAUDIBLE]? Should I give you the answer now or the truth?

Well, the Pampa is the most fertile land in the world if you plant wheat.

If you plant and and soybeans if you if you want to grow cows.

And the Indians had no wheat, no soybeans and no cows.

Right. So, uh, before, before, uh, the Spaniards arrived.

So when the Spaniards arrived, now, you could have cows. But what are you going to do with a meat?

So in Argentina, in olden times. Cows were for free.

You could kill a cow if you needed, if you were hungry. But you had to leave the hides because the hide was the valuable thing.

Because you could try the hide and make it into leather and so on. And so while the meat, it rots.

So Argentina started to develop when they brought in first the, um,

the rail system and then refrigerated ships and with refrigerated refrigerated ships and,

and uh, and the rail system, they could make meat into a tradable.

So suddenly you could export meat to Europe. And suddenly all the Europeans went to Argentina because, you know, the more fertile land, etc.

So. So you see that, eh, things are going to be valuable conditional on what technologies exist.

Okay. So that's I remember that it's an important little thing.

You say, oh, natural advantage. No natural advantage combined with some particular technology and changes in technology means that,

you know, things that were worthless now become super valuable.

People thought that desert deserts were useless because there was no water, and there's no water because there is no rain,

and there's no rain because there are no clouds and no clouds means there's a lot of sun.

So a solar panel now, it's super valuable. So desert land is now super valuable.

Thank God, the desert, because it never rains. So we get, you know, full solar power, right?

So it's always conditional on some technology in.

Anyway, some cities get started with low complexity industries because they start with few letters,

and they may increase their complexity as they accumulate letters over time.

Okay. So a city is a little bit forms a little bit like a crystal in crystals.

The way they grow is by this thing that they call preferential attachment.

You have some atoms that kind of like each other.

So if there's a crystal that has a bunch of these atoms and some another atom comes along,

it finds a crystal and once attached to the crystal, then the crystal starts growing.

All right. That's a way. For example, snowflakes grow. Okay, yes I think.

So, professor, when, uh, a city grows beyond a certain level, there is no land left.

So there are many multinational corporations. Many say, for example, uh, manufacturing industries, which will have their, uh,

headquarters in the city, but the manufacturing units will be set 100km or 200km away from the city.

So in those cases, uh, where would you attribute the exports to the center where the headquarter is or the place where the manufacturing takes?

No, you would, uh, you would attribute it to the place where activity takes place.

So and that's a headache we have empirically that we need to, uh, you know, if, if, if a firm has multiple plant,

many plants, uh, you need to attribute the production to the plants, not to headquarter.

And that's why, you know, we worked hard in, in the Mexican for us to, to make sure if you don't make this correction,

uh, Mexico City's main export is oil, because that's where the headquarters of the oil company are.

But but you said something that I kind of disagree with, that you said that the city runs out of space.

Cynthia Priore doesn't run out of space, but there's something that is going to force some activities to live.

I'm going to get there in a little while.

Okay, so the point I want to make is that crystals grow because no atoms like to attach to other items of their kind,

and that's how the crystal grows. But how does the crystals start?

And the idea is that the crystal starts with a seed.

So that's why they call this idea of seeding the clouds.

They put some some small material there in the clouds that facilitates the formation of of of crystals.

Okay. So you need a seed on which the crystals are going to form.

And sometimes the seed this transitory and disappears.

But once the crystal gets going the seed is no longer important.

Sometimes this the crystal is not big enough.

And if the seed disappears, the crystal disappears.

Okay. So, um, I would put it to you that the growth of, uh, city resembles the growth of crystal.

Okay. That, uh, letters want to be there because there are other letters there.

Okay. But they start forming around the seed,

and the seed has to have some characteristic that compensates for the initial disadvantage, that there's nothing there.

And if there's nothing there, nobody wants to be there because nobody's there. Right.

So, you know, if you're a letter, there's nobody there. Who are you going to combine with?

So you don't want to be there. So nobody wants to be there because nobody's there. So how do you break that chicken and egg problem?

Well, there has to be an excuse. And the excuse has to be this.

This seed has to be some activity that is there that can a be exported and allow for this place to start importing.

Okay.

So um, and then once, once this export activity is there, you're going to have a lot of other letters being you'll have demand for the non tradable.

So the letters that make the non-tradable will have to go there.

And then there'll be more letters. And there are other people that come in might be able to make more things and so on.

So let me give you an example from the city of Denver. Um, the city of Denver got started because of the Pikes Peak Gold Rush.

They found gold and silver in in those mountains in 1858.

The city was surrounded by the fertile plains of the South Platte River.

Um, so farming became attractive.

It's, you know, out there in the boondocks. Who would ever go there to make food?

Who are you going to sell the food? Well, you would sell the food because now there are miners that need to eat, right?

And then maybe you want to process a little bit of food. So you have some agro industry and stuff.

And manufacturing got started to process the food and to produce tools for the miners.

You know, the guys who made the money were not the guys. Uh, you know what we're gonna see soon?

Because with the pickaxes. Pickaxes.

But the guys selling them the pickaxes. Oh, so somebody had to make the pickaxes.

And then finance developed, you know, to find the guys making the pickaxes or to sell the pickaxes or whatever.

So, uh, and then, by the way, in 1870 or so, they got connected to the rail system.

Okay. But by 1892, the mining collapsed.

So they had a good 20 years of mining, but then 30 years of mining, and then it collapsed.

But by then you had the food processing industry that could export beer, for example.

You could take the wheat.

It's very cumbersome to export wheat or barley, you know, process it locally, um, transform it into something that's more valuable.

And by then they had the rail system, so, so you could ship it through the rail system.

In 1938, Denver was chosen to put the North American Air Defense Command so big a military thing,

and many other federal agencies located their agencies there, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency.

In fact, Denver is the second largest city in terms of the number of federal employees.

Okay, now, because you have, you know, the Defense command, the Air Defense Command there, then the aerospace industry wanted to move there.

Okay. And Raytheon, Northrop Grumman, Ball helicopters, they all have their headquarters in Denver.

Okay. Now, if you have a bunch of companies with headquarters in Denver, they'll want to to be able to travel to other places.

So they developed the Denver Airport. And the Denver airport is now the fifth largest in the world, the third largest in the US.

Not because Denver is such an important city, but because you need you need a hub somewhere.

And, well, they put the hub in Denver. So it's people going from San Francisco to to Atlanta.

But, you know, United has its hub in Denver and southwest has its hub in Denver.

And many other companies then are attracted because if you locate in Denver, you have all of these direct flights to so many other places.

So I think the moral of the story is the seed was the gold.

But who the [INAUDIBLE] cares now? There's enough letters there that A and all of these letters have to do with export activities.

One export activity is federal services, right?

So, you know, the whole military thing or the EPA and all these other agencies,

they it's money that came from taxpayers from outside of the city that paid wages inside of the city.

So it's like an export. Okay. Okay.

Now, cities in oil rich countries a typically don't export anything.

Yes. I had a quick question.

So you said the seed was the call, that somehow there was also some sort of public seed, right.

Like was this new industry that was created, um, and maybe like in Detroit, for example, didn't have this chance of having this new,

you know, government agency to install themselves, like to, to spark this additional growth.

So I was just wondering, so the government would probably, for example,

not decide to go in Wyoming because there's not enough basic grounds that they

would go to a city like Denver because it was already like surplus seed.

So I was just wondering if this is a pattern that you see, I'm here. It was the government.

It could be at something else, right?

Um, I mean, you make a very good point and we'll discuss it also, the next lecture on remoteness, um, Brasilia would not exist,

you know, had the government decided to move the capital out of Rio de Janeiro, right, to, uh, a new part of the country, right?

I mean, you might say the same thing. So, so many places, for example, Albuquerque, San Diego and so on.

They grew because of federal. The first thing that they did was export federal services, if you want.

And that's an example, you know, so you get the see, for example, in Wyoming, one of the things that grew was health care.

Now is health care or non-tradable or is health care of tradable.

Is health care or non-tradable or is health care of tradable in our language here?

Is it an export? Yeah, it could be.

You know, it depends on the procedure. It depends on the procedure.

Suppose you are treating only local people. Um.

Well, if those local people are poor, then Medicaid pays.

If all all or if those people are old, then Medicare pays.

So it's a service that it's paid by Washington, delivered in Wyoming.

Right. So if suddenly Wyoming, you know, the government becomes more generous in health care to the poor,

in health care that allows for the growth of the health care industry and a lot of money coming into town.

So you have more doctors, more this. And now the doctors have to get their haircut and they have to buy their groceries,

etc., etc. and you get the multiplier effect on all the other non traders.

Okay. So it's not important now in oil exporting countries and most cities don't export anything.

So you have to ask yourself the question how do they live.

Well they live because some other place where oil happens to be on the ground exports a lot.

But this thing gets taxed a lot because it contains a lot of rents.

And those rents get spent in in your city.

So if you do the balance of payments of the city, the city will get all these unrequited transfers.

They're called in balance of payments jargon. They get these transfers.

There's money that's being sent from outside like a remittance. If you want that then becomes like an export.

If you think of the balance of payments of of a suburb, they're basically exporting labor services to the central business district,

and they're getting wages compensated that they bring to spend in their locality.

So the export of uh, suburb is, is the workers that go work outside of that suburb.

Okay. Now. So you'll get that the cities in oil exporting countries and they don't export anything.

They live off these off of these rents.

But these rents are going to make this export is going to make the city relatively more expensive through this Dutch disease.

And in a couple of weeks we'll talk about Dutch disease and more in, in more detail.

So it's going to make your non-tradable more expensive. So that makes them uncompetitive.

And as a consequence they never diversify. So it's not.

If they don't become steppingstones into something. Because they were never competitive.

So when oil rents decline, they can get into serious trouble because there's no other export industry to take this space.

Okay, so far, so good. So we now have a little bit of a way of thinking about cities.

Now I'm going to introduce a really, really important concept that is due to Ed Glaeser.

Yes. Yeah. I have a question in terms of cities. Now that you used that example of Wyoming, people outside of the city goes to a city,

for example, or to retain, uh, restaurants like people go into city.

Is that an expert? Yes. So in tourism also, it's it's things you make in the city that you sell to people from outside the city.

So it brings money into the city. That's not what happens to a goods.

Where does the money come from? Okay. So for example, universities and tertiary hospitals are export.

So, you know, the Boston health care system provides services to to a bunch of people.

And so now I'm going to introduce the concept of spatial equilibrium.

Have you seen this before. Okay.

So the idea is that countries have places that interact with each other.

And also they uh and. So we think of the economy at a country level as composed of a set of cities.

Each city is a small open economy. It's, uh.

So think of it as an open economy, right? But it's a super open economy because the labor market is also open.

So people are free to move in and out of the city to other cities in the country.

So we typically when we write small open economy model of the labor, that the labor supply is kind of exogenous, it's given.

Right. Or it responds very slowly through migration.

But in a in a city, a air human flows are going to be much more important.

And because of this, this is going to create spatial equilibrium in the sense that it can be that if you lived in Santiago,

you'd be much better off than if you lived in Puerto Monge, because then everybody would leave Puerto and go to Santiago.

So at some point in time, this thing is going to equilibrate. And when it equilibrate, it means that the utility of living in Santiago,

the marginal utility of living in Santiago, will have to equate the marginal utility of living in Puerto.

Okay. So you can ask yourself the question, would successful cities pay higher wages?

You say? Well, it's a successful city is a more productive city.

They can pay higher wages. But if you're an entrepreneur, why the [INAUDIBLE] would you?

Would you pay higher wages? Right. If if you can attract people from other places.

So one way to think about it is suppose that there is nothing, no complications.

I'm going to add a set of complications in a little while. I'm going to add housing.

I'm going to add amenities. I'm going to add more complications.

But let's take the complications away. And let's assume that the only thing people care about is the wage.

Okay. And and suppose there are two cities in this country.

One city is is successful.

So my teaching team called it Victoria from victory.

And the other city is really lousy. So they called it Lousiana.

Okay. No, because Victoria is very successful.

It has a marginal product of labor that is very high sold.

So by the way, the population of of Victoria is, is measured from here.

And the population of Lousiana is measured from here.

Okay. And and this is, is the total population of a country.

So a Louisiana is a Victoria is very it's very successful.

That's why it has a marginal part of labor way out there okay.

And Louisiana is lousy. So it has the marginal product of labor not very far okay.

So it's much, much lower. The equilibrium is going to be at a place where these wages get equalized because otherwise people would be moving.

Right. And what adjusts is the relative size of Victoria to Lousiana okay.

Now this has a little bit the flavor of the Malthusian model.

In the sense that all good things go into population growth.

Remember? You know my fusion motto. You have to do something good.

It goes into population growth. It doesn't go into income per capita growth.

Here, if you move this curve out, you're going to move a little bit the wage up,

but a lot of it is going to go into into Victoria being bigger and Lousiana being smaller.

So the reason why the wage goes up is because now you can reallocate people to to the better place.

So. This this model is going to have this kind of like a malthusian flavor to it.

Okay. That good things go into population growth.

That's going to mean that the rate of growth of a city, or the relative rate of growth of the population in the city,

is likely to be related to the relative rate of productivity growth of the city vis-a-vis the rest of the country.

So the cities that grow faster tend to have faster productivity growth in the cities

that grow more slowly because they're competing for labor and they're attracting labor.

But what labor cares about is, is really welfare, you know, call it quality of life.

And that depends not only on the wages. So your tradable industries are going to care just only on the wages.

What's the wage you need to pay to attract the labor force that you need.

Right. And if you're in downtown Santiago, maybe you have to pay them more to attract them because it's more expensive to live.

So that means that they care not only about the wages, but about the cost of living of those wages.

Okay. And one of the things that's going to make a cost of living particularly different across cities,

one of them is the cost of housing, which is going to be related to the cost of land.

And I have not introduced land. And was it, uh, was it Prateek that mentioned we ran out of land?

So I haven't mentioned land.

And, you know, a if the city becomes bigger or it's very sprawling, then people are going to live very far from where they work.

And how do they go from where they live to where they work.

So there's a transportation cost or commute cost that you have to factor in in terms of quality of life, and then you have amenities.

Maybe you have a beautiful Central Park. It's a super congested place or or you know, it has good schools.

So people are going to be adding and subtracting all of these things to decide.

I'd rather live here. I'd rather live there. Okay. So, um, if there's a gap, say if if a, if a city has, for example.

So let me ask you if a city has. Lower crime.

Other things equal. Other things equal. If a city has low crime, good public transportation, high quality schools, what will that do to wages?

Laura. Huh? Try to become Heather rich.

And why would the wage be lower? Because you got more leisure workers.

You to be. Why do you have more supply of workers? Migration.

Because you have better quality of life. So. Right.

So a good competitive city is a city that can attract workers at a lower wage because it has great things.

So you know again this is you know, very non it's very malthusian in spirit.

It's very counterintuitive. You would think that all good things go together, right.

If you have good schools and good things and good soil you'll also have good salaries.

Now if you have all these good things, your wages are going to go down in spatial equilibrium.

Okay. And maybe because your wages go down your tradable sector becomes more competitive.

So the tradable sector becomes more competitive because now it can pay lower wages because workers don't care so much about the wage,

but they care about the quality of life, quality of a school system, etcetera, etcetera.

Right. Good.

So if there is a gap, say, for example, the only difference between a city and city B is that in city A commute costs are higher than in city B.

Okay. Then city will have to pay a higher wage to compensate for the commute costs relative to city B, right.

And in there's going to be, uh, a reallocation of, of workers to, um, between the two cities to,

to pay for this higher in order to allow for wages to differ enough to pay for the commute, the difference in the commute cost.

Okay. Okay. Now, so the idea of spatial equilibrium is that people are free to move within a country.

So they may choose or stay where they go.

They will balance some attributes like income, the wages that they can get, a, you know, the unemployment rate in that city,

meaning the probability that you will find a job, um, costs, housing, transport, taxes, utilities, etc. amenities.

You know, these amenities like crime, congestion, bad weather, etc. for example,

a good predictor of whether a city in the US grows or doesn't grow is temperature in

January that the the colder the temperature in January is the lesser of a growth.

But I'm going to guess that with global warming it's going to be temperature in August.

Okay. So cities cannot improve their competitiveness by just lowering wages because people would leave.

But places that have better amenities and lower costs can pay lower wages and people would still stay.

This makes them more competitive. So good things about the city makes it more competitive.

Not because necessarily it's going to make them more productive.

That's a different argument. That's a different policy. But because if you can attract workers at a lower wage.

Okay. But okay, so that has led in a Glaeser to propose something that he calls consumption cities, which are really a confusing term.

But what he says is make your city as attractive as possible so that people come to live.

And now that they're here, they're electors and they can go and do other things.

They will do other things. So so you attract people by being a super cool city.

Okay. Now suppose some things have an inelastic supply.

Suppose things have an inelastic supply. So labor is free to move.

But suppose housing is completely inelastic.

Completely inelastic. Okay.

So the number of units is already predetermined.

Um so a if if housing is completely inelastic, then the population of the city cannot grow because there's nowhere to live.

So if you have if you get hit by a positive shock, like, you know, somebody comes and creates a new firm,

a new monkey jumps to a new tree and it's a very sexy tree and so on.

So it tries to grow, okay.

And this new, more complex thing, what's going to happen? So funding will go up somewhat.

Cost of housing will go up because more money is chasing that same budget.

Okay. So what will happen to the size of the city? Limits of size to some extent, right?

Because of housing growth and the cost of living is too high, you know, or not.

Well, I mean, why why, why does the price of housing go up?

Because there's no more housing, right? So the same you'll have the same number of people living there.

Right. So it just the price goes up. And what happens when the price goes up?

How does. So why do you get an equilibrium demand.

Because okay. Because demand goes out. And why did the man go a go down prices.

Yeah. So where are the where are people living under the bridge.

So they left. So this is what they call gentrification, right.

When there's an inelastic supply of labor, then, you know, a positive shock means that the people, more people want to be there.

So the guys who can afford it are going to pay the higher price of housing.

And the guys who can't afford it leave. So this is going to make growth super controversial.

You say, oh, the city growth grows, but I won't be able to afford the city anymore.

I'll have to leave. But that's really a consequence of inelastic supply of housing.

And it's not just inelastic supply of housing, but it could be an elastic supply of infrastructure.

Right. So more people come in the same number of roads, the same number of everything.

And so now it's just more congested and it makes it less attractive for everybody else.

So you don't get kind of like the full benefits of of the story.

Maybe the tax revenues of the city don't grow proportionally with the growth of the city.

Okay. So there are more people, more activity, more stuff.

But the city government doesn't have more money to have more police, more garbage collection, more, you know, whatever.

And as a consequence, you can get, um, the government cannot come and accompany the growth process.

You get congestion, you get crime, you get electricity shortages, worker shortages, for example.

Okay. And and so spatial equilibrium will imply different wages between cities to compensate for differences in the other things.

And important if you want to do growth diagnostics of a region or a city.

Okay. You can you know, is a city have a productivity problem.

Well, let's look at their population growth.

If the city has a, you know, and if our wage is going up and employment going up or our wages going up and employment going down,

you know, in our is, is crime related to the wages of the city needs to pay and so on.

So for example, San Francisco is a super expensive city.

This is compared to the national average.

And it has, you know, a triple the housing prices that than the national average.

And in San Francisco. Yes. Marcelo. Yeah. Sorry. I just have a question.

Back to gentrification. Does it mean that gentrification is a consequence of loss of attractiveness, or is that because something else is happening?

No, no. Gentrification is is the fact that a place becomes more attractive, right.

And um, so there's more something increases the demand for the place where productivity, labor productivity went up.

So firms want to hire more people, etc. And as they try to hire more people, more people try to come in and they bid up the price of housing.

So housing becomes scarcer. So the higher wage earners are going to be able to afford the housing, and the lower wage earners will have to leave.

That's the mechanism. But it all goes back to this inelastic supply of housing.

So in elasticities of supply are going to dramatically change the size of growth and the political economy of growth,

because inelastic supplies are going to cause very large redistributive effects.

Okay. So it's something now cities are leaving markets and it's going to I strongly recommend that you read this book.

Okay. And. This is probably the best book I read like three years ago.

And you know, there are three moving pieces in the city.

Households locate them in space, firms locate in space, and infrastructure connects them.

Okay, now people move to cities in order to interact with other people and enjoy the amenities of the city.

The well connected parts of the city are going to be more attractive because you have more access, cheaper access to more things.

So centrally located, things become more attractive and people want to live there.

And little bit of the price of land. Okay, so space is not homogeneous.

Whenever there's an accumulation, there's a place that's more central. The more central place is going to be more attractive.

Now if you have to pay more money for land, maybe you want to build higher.

Because that way you can amortize the land over more floors.

And there's something in the urban stuff that's called the floor area ratio.

What's the area of a floor zone over the area of surface that you are occupying?

Okay. And typically building higher is a little bit more expensive.

So you're you're trading off building higher which is a little bit more expensive with amortizing your land over more floors.

Okay. Now that higher price of land and maybe higher cost of construction of of built

up things is going to make people need to trade off housing place prices.

So I can afford say you can afford an apartment of $1 million, you can afford $1 million.

It's not going to be a house in the suburbs. Is it going to be a small apartment in the city?

So you're trading off apartment size or housing size for housing location, right?

Um, and maybe commute costs. Right. So if you're poor, you cannot afford a good house.

So you want a cheaper house? A cheaper house is farther away. If it's farther away, then then you need to pay more in transportation costs.

And we're going to revisit this issue in a couple of weeks. When we talk about labor markets, when we're introducing commute costs in labor markets.

Okay. And now, um, so typically poor people tend to live in the periphery of cities and they face very high transportation costs.

Yes, yes we do. Sorry. But this is like and the one before.

How does the logic change if you assume, uh, proportion of people own their homes and a proportion of the people are renting.

Right. So for some people, uh, including matter, it shouldn't matter because you can own a home and rent it and rent a home that you live in.

So in principle, people can substitute and they can sell and buy.

But don't you benefit from the asset price increase?

You. Yeah. The the owners benefit from the asset price increase.

But they can realize that gain by selling and moving to a cheaper place.

Right. So in no.

The poor can potentially outcompete the rich and well-connected parts of the city if you allow them to build high enough.

So what this is going to tell us is that we should expect that the better located parts of the city have higher built up density.

There's more floors per unit of area, more density.

Okay. And then as the land becomes cheaper, then people, you know, use more land, right.

And build lower. So this should generate the shape of cities that we see, right.

That the central business district is very dense.

And then it declines as you move out. And, you know, that's more or less the shape of most cities.

We were. Puzzled that, you know, Johannesburg doesn't look that way.

We were wondering why the [INAUDIBLE] would Johannesburg look so different? And, you know, the history of apartheid behind that then and and so on.

So. So typically you observe these this is density a person's per hectare.

And this is distance from the central business district. You see typically these these shapes.

Okay. Um, and for example this is.

Land values. So.

Look at what is the price people are willing to pay for the central business district relative to the average night value in New York City,

they pay 22 times more. In Washington, D.C. they pay 32 times more.

So these. So then you have to see who's able to afford that, you know,

or what would you do with density if you if you're allowed to build in Washington, they don't let you build over, I think nine stories.

So. Now housing policies typically regulate density.

And and we have found are density. So in our analysis of South Africa we found that these extremely low densities in cities is mandated by regulation.

And so you don't allow people to build like this zoning okay.

Zoning rules. And so we we for example, we've done a lot of work now on zoning things both in South Africa and Wyoming.

Wyoming has also super restrictive zoning laws now.

And emotion and aim is is a city of only detached houses.

There are no apartments. Only 0.5% of the people live in apartment buildings.

It's only individual houses. So it's super low density and the growth of the city and this dark things are new things.

Things that were built up after 2000. The are get built up in the periphery of the city.

So there's no you can look at the growth of the city and the growth of density at the center, or just expansion of the surface area.

What you find is that in you, it's all expansion.

So good. You know what they call horizontal growth.

But the more you have horizontal growth, the bigger the transport cost is going to be, because people are not going to be farther away.

So we have to transport more of a distance. And all the public transportation systems are not going to be very effective, because with low density,

you don't you cannot justify bus rapid transit, you cannot justify a metro because there's just not enough traffic to justify these things.

So you're trapped and having to have, um, uh, a bus.

It also means that the provision of, of things like water, electricity and so on becomes more complicated.

Okay. Um, and the in elasticity of housing comes from the fact that you cannot build a

house if they cannot promise that you'll have water and they don't have water,

or they have limits in the expansion of water. So that's going to make housing inelastic, okay.

And that's going to lead to, to, you know, shantytowns to informal settlements.

Uh. Yeah.

You know, so so there's this idea that housing is not built around new roads.

New roads are being built to connect informal housing.

So your, your, your, uh, you did not expand the housing supply.

People did it kind of like illegally informally and one that they are settled there.

You are politically you know your incentive is to is to correct them.

So so we looked at the supply and demand of housing and we found that, um, housing was a constraint then, you know,

so the growth of the city was being limited by the fact that housing was not adequately supplied,

in spite of the fact that it's not a congested place. It's a super, you know, spread out places.

It's very sprawling. Okay. So, um, in, um, uh, I, we calculated for every American town, every American county we calculated.

So this is, um, this is a we have a model of, of housing values that depends on the size of cities, etc.

And this is the expected price of, of housing.

And all of these counties in Wyoming are more expensive than the expected amount.

And we said, well, why the [INAUDIBLE] would Wyoming, which is such an empty place, have expensive housing?

So we tested some hypothesis. Maybe the cost of materials is higher.

That didn't pan out. What we did find out is that in.

A infrastructure had a lot to do.

If you don't expand. If you don't expand the water network, then people have to have enough land to put a water well and a septic tank.

But if they're going to put a water well in a septic tank, they need to be very far apart from each other so as not to contaminate each other's water.

So then you put you regulate a minimum plot size.

So they have these huge plot size requirements like five acres.

And as a consequence they have these block size regulations.

And we found out that, for example, in Sheridan that there is a there's bunching at the legal limit that these people might have wanted less land,

but they're constrained to buy more land because they're forced to be farther apart.

And we found similar things, you know, everybody bunching up at this, at this limit and in this other city in Wyoming.

And so, um, this is going to create, um, this is going to create a very inelastic supply of, of housing, which is going to limit city growth.

And what we did here is we estimated the elasticity of supply of housing in the US for all the counties of the US.

Okay. And this is the Z-score of how different is the elasticity of these places relative to the elasticity, the average elasticity in the US.

And you see that except for these two places, which are weird places, and in these places you have much lower elasticities of supply.

This is measured in units of standard deviation. Okay.

So the elasticity of supply is much lower in spite of the fact that it's an empty space.

And it comes from the fact that these guys are under investing in infrastructure,

especially water infrastructure, which is forcing these super spread out places because they're super spread out.

You cannot live in Wyoming without if you don't own a car, and if you don't own a car,

that means if you have to own a car, then there's a lot of the income distribution that cannot live there.

So there are no African Americans in Wyoming.

There's no migrants to my poor migrants to Wyoming because it's too expensive a place to live because of the structure of a town.

And so let me finish by saying, since these are very open economies with an open labor market, this makes exports all the more important.

And so for that, your complexity analysis is super good because, right, it allows you to understand what else the.

