[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
I knew even. When.

I was talking about time I was in. My life.

Is that how you said last name? Yeah. Thanks for that. Perfect.

Any time you need to. I'm never going to pronounce another last name.

I have a perfect record. Now, don't worry about it.

You. Were good, and everybody was.

Well, I thought it was. Like five more minutes.

Okay, so I got this thing.

Where do you think? I know you're not saying things like when?

They say, Senator. Senator.

I know you said. Oh, we had a negotiation.

You may have heard of, uh, I was Washington.

Washington state. I'm Democrat. Yes, I was a rebel.

Yeah. I never heard anyone say, if you ever do feel.

Like or maximize my benefits. I'm happy to be surrounded by such people for nothing but your future, senator.

Uh, please. You know, this is going to mean something.

So that's why you're here. Truth for Rosebud.

Yeah. I'm rooting for himself. I won't say I won't do your part.

I will need them on time. So why did you sign up now?

Sure. Um, yes. They might have wanted to run the Cowboys as well.

Is looking for something. Super fast.

Oh, really? Yeah.

So here you have someone from. The mission, right?

Yes. Part of the. Country.

Okay. Nice. Isn't that right?

Yeah. You know what? I'm really sorry.

You've been so. Busy, I got you.

Yeah. Oh, yeah. I'm going to talk about Grace.

Hello? Okay, so, uh, this is another kind of newish lecture.

This is, uh, second time I. I include a lecture on remoteness in this course, but this one is very significantly changed from from last year.

And I think the theme for the work they put into into making it.

So the first housekeeping, the problems that the two is due on Monday.

So I'm sure you're going to have a fun weekend. Um, and, and you have to finalize groups by the end of next week.

Uh, and. Uh, so, so no country repeats, but you can choose a city in, in, uh, in a country that's somebody else has chosen.

And the fourth member, if any, must be a non-paid.

That's still so. Yes. Good, good.

Okay, so I don't know if you know the story of Aussie, uh, but Aussie ehm, is, uh, uh, is, um, man that lived about 5300 years ago,

3300 B.C. and thanks to global warming, uh, you know, glaciers receded and they discovered his body from 30 years ago.

And so this is, you know, a hunter gatherer.

He was a hunter many, many moons ago. And you'd say, well, this this guy can live on his own, right?

And he's quite independent and lives on his own. Except that when they found him, his body, they found all these things in it.

And so he had clothes made with variable animal skins.

And he had a copper ax. There's no copper near this place.

And he found arrows with flint. Heads and the flint near source of flint was hundreds of kilometers away.

Right. They found the flint knife. They found dry fungus to start fires.

And they found a pouch with tools such as a scraper and a drill.

So most likely, this guy did not make these things.

This guy probably traded for these things. So this guy, even though, you know, so you you think of him as, you know, Robinson Crusoe,

he was dependent on the work of others and on the access to things that were far away copper, flint, etc.

Okay. Another story is the story of, uh, lost Ohmydog.

Which is, uh, a find that it was discovered in Canadian Newfoundland.

And it was, uh, Viking establishment in the year 1000.

Apparently, the archeological finds suggest that it was inhabited for a period of about ten years.

The Vikings came from Iceland, probably went through Greenland and got here to Newfoundland.

And that's where they were this find this so way before Christopher Columbus.

But they couldn't stay and they didn't stay. And if you ask yourself why they couldn't stay and why they didn't stay is that they probably

needed a lot of stuff to refurbish their ships to things that they could not find in place.

Um, so they needed to import these things.

But to import you need to export. And there was nothing they could do there, but they could trade with Scandinavia for their exports.

So this stuff didn't take. Okay.

So in this remote place, human life was impossible.

It then came, you know, in 1606, Jamestown.

Um, there's, um.

You know, it's amazing that people registered, uh, a company called the Virginia, uh, company and, uh, to create a new colony in Virginia.

Right. And, uh, and they raised a ton of money, uh, to, to create that colony.

And, you know, if you raise a ton of money, then that means that the money that's flowing into Virginia is coming from London.

So it's not. And with that, they could pay for the imports that Virginia would need.

But they tried to learn from the Indians surrounding them what they could grow.

They tried to grow other things that many of them failed, but they couldn't find anything to that they could export.

They tried tobacco, but in tobacco the tobacco there was horrible, didn't taste well until they found some seeds.

And around 1612, some Venezuelan seeds, actually from the Orinoco River basin.

And that gave a much milder flavor. So suddenly they found that they could export tobacco, and only then did, uh, colony stabilized, starving, etc.,

until they found something that they could export in exchange for all the things that they needed to import.

And that's how the colony got started. And another interesting story is the Hudson Bay colony story, where.

You know, people, um, got to and to Canada and they had them the idea, you know,

they wanted to establish themselves, but they needed something they could export.

So eventually, um, you know, there were Indians there.

They wondered what could we do in exchange for those Indians?

And he said, well, maybe we can buy hides, furs from the Indians.

That convenience could go out and and hunt, sell the furs, and then you could trade the first.

And interestingly, they brought in horses which were not indigenous to the continent and guns.

So suddenly Indian life was radically transformed, because suddenly now Indians have horses and Indians have gone.

So they become much more efficient hunters. And so you got a fur and height industry?

Yeah. And that's how Canada was settled.

Yeah. So you see that life depends on inputs from others.

But for you to survive there, you need to be able to trade for the inputs that you need from others what it is that you are able to trade.

So in the last lecture we studied the advantages of agglomerations.

Right. That just want to be together. And as a consequence you know if you are letter you're better off being next to

many letters because then you can go into many words and into longer words etc.

Right. But so you can ask yourself the question, then why the [INAUDIBLE] would be people living in in godforsaken places?

Why why why would they be there? Huh?

Now, spatial equilibrium implies that, um, you know, utilities, uh, marginal utilities get equalize across space, right?

So the people that live in very remote places, uh, you know, a, you know,

the marginal utility gets equalized at a very low population right here at a very low population.

But but the population is non-zero if you're talking about people living in a remote place.

So why is it not zero? Like, you know, it ends up being in Latin and also middle in.

Well, for it not to be zero, they need to be able to export something.

And then you would ask yourself,

but what the [INAUDIBLE] can you export in a very remote place with few people because few people and means few letters.

So what could they possibly export?

Um, and the answer is that, you know, there probably has to be some geographic locational advantage, whether it's mining, whether it's agriculture,

maybe it's a super nice tourist tourist destination, maybe it's a place that for very haphazard reasons, eh, connects other places.

Um, you know, the, um, uh, the rivers in in the southeast of the U.S., uh, if you start from the sea, they're quite navigable up to a point.

And then mountains come. And so the rivers were navigable until then.

And then then you have to take stuff off the rivers and load them into something.

So in the places that were there was the gradient that stopped the river being navigable.

That's where you have towns today. The towns evolved because, you know, people needed to take stuff off the rivers.

But since then nobody uses the river for transportation.

The towns have to stay. Okay. So. Chicago probably was developed not because Chicago had a lot of land,

but because Chicago was surrounded by a lot of land in a place it was very with a lot of connectivity.

Okay. So there has to be some locational advantage for remote places to be there.

So in the language of of 309, some places have a lot of letters, some places have few letters.

And you know, a what do you do if you are, you know, one of these letters in a remote place, right.

Why would you want to stay there? Okay. So remoteness and agglomeration are kind of two sides of the same coin.

And I think it was John who. Oh, we are more invented this metaphor.

I said, why the [INAUDIBLE] do you have Lincoln there? So it's two sides of the same coin.

Okay. So it's kind of like last lecture.

We talked about cities and agglomeration. This lecture we talked about the the other end okay.

So. So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to marry two frameworks.

The framework of economic complexity with a framework of economic gravity.

Okay now, so, um, remoteness is about thinking about spatial structure of production interacts with the ability of disconnected places to grow.

Okay. Economic complexity is a way of thinking about the nature of technology, production, diversification,

etc. and economic gravity is a unified framework to think about economic activity over physical space.

Okay. And so I'm going to try to marry these two frameworks okay.

And see where that gets us. So let me start with gravity because we've already discussed complexity.

So the idea with gravity is that in physics, you know,

two bodies are supposed to attract each other as a function of the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance.

Right? So the, um, the sun and the earth attract each other, you know, the sun is bigger, etc.,

but the force is proportional to the product of the masses and inversely proportional to the distance.

So in phase in in economics they say, okay, how much interaction is there going to be in between two places?

It's going to be a function of how big are these two places and and how far they are from each other.

So if this is the same function and you take logs,

then it's going to be that the log of the interaction is a function of the log of the sizes minus the log of the distance.

Okay. And with some coefficients.

So that's that's the basic idea. Now I mentioned a very imprecise word I said interaction.

What the [INAUDIBLE] do I mean by interaction? Well, I mean a lot of stuff, right?

It could be trade. Exports. How much do you export between two locations?

It could be a migration flows.

How many people from this country live in that country, etc.

It could be FDI, right? How many people from this country invest in the other country or how much money, etc.?

How many people travel? How many people a co invent?

How many people could write scientific papers?

So all of these things are interactions between locations.

Um, and so, you know, it's become sort of like a cottage industry to just run these, these gravity equations.

Okay. So they, they show up pretty much everywhere.

And, and, you know, it allows us to think about, um, a about about interactions.

Now the question is, why the [INAUDIBLE] would distance matter?

And the idea is that distance imposes some kind of friction.

On interactions. Right. And. And what are those frictions?

So in one friction can be you know, it is costly to move stuff from one place to the other, right.

So there are some transportation costs. That stuff is heavier.

The stuff the more expensive it would be to transport it.

But it could also be that, you know, a place, a the distance that matters is not a geographic distance, but maybe a cultural distance.

Right. So for example, Venezuela is right next to Trinidad and Tobago.

But it just so happens that we speak Spanish and they speak English. And so that that creates a chasm that that amount of interaction.

I mean, there is a place in, in Venezuela where you can stand up and see Trinidad on the other side.

But, but the gulf is enormous because there's a language difference.

Okay. A culture might matter.

Diasporas might matter. We know. We know that, for example, when.

When you have people from country living in country B, other things equal, there's more trade between the two.

Okay. So that suggests that, you know, there's some some other forms of course, that might matter.

Ease of business travel. There's a bunch of papers that use as an instrument the fact that the longest flights are, I don't know, 16 hours.

I don't know how many kilometers that is. And so within that distance, you can you could have direct flights.

And if and the question is what's the impact of not having direct flights versus having direct flights?

So in.

It can be also visa regulations, airport quality or frequency or your name can be other things like transport risk, financial risk, fees, etc. if any.

Foreign exchange distortions. There's a lot of papers that show that if you share a currency, there's much more trade.

So apparently, you know, exchange rate frictions might matter, etc., or you might have sanctions or other things.

So the most remote places tend to have small size.

So they have a low mass. They're very distant from partners and they have a high cost of traversing that distance.

So just to show you the, the geography of, of of this pool, this, as you know, is the map of France.

And this is the intensity with which France trades with Belgium.

Belgium is right here. You see that the people who trade with Belgium are right on the border with Belgium.

Time. The people who trade with Switzerland are right on the border with Switzerland.

The people who trade with Italy are right on the border of Italy.

And the people who trade with Spain are right on the border of Spain.

No. And this people who trade with Germany are right on the border with Germany.

So? So even within countries, the pool of of gravity, uh, you know, impacts.

Okay. So. So we can ask ourselves if you start from a certain place.

How much of global GDP can you reach? So this is distance.

Okay. And this is a you know how how much of global GDP interact.

So the blue one is the Netherlands. The purple one is Lila.

You know, within a 2000km or so, they are at 25% of world GDP, right.

In Korea. Within less than that, they are at 25% of world GDP because they're, you know, before we get to Japan and China, they are 25% of GDP.

But for Namibia or for who the [INAUDIBLE] is this Australia?

You know, to get to 25% to one GDP, they need to transfer 8000km.

Okay. So some places just are closer to world GDP than others.

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to add from each location it's distance to world GDP weighted by distance.

Okay. And we call that market access and this market access.

So these are the countries measured in terms of market access.

Now you see that Europe has a lot of market access, because every country in Europe is close to many other rich countries and so on.

While Namibia poor here is is very far away from the global GDP.

Now notice that the US looks very far away from global GDP, but Canada looks very close to global GDP.

Why is that? Well because for for for Canada it's very close to the US.

The US is actually very close to itself, which is a big economy.

And China is very close to itself, which is a big economy.

But we did not count how close you are to yourself.

Okay. So when you do this foreign market access, this is what you get.

This is the foreign market access. And this is how rich you are.

And there's a pretty good relationship between, you know, where you are, where you are and how rich you are.

Okay. So gravity is going to imply, you know, that if you are near a large, rich countries,

you're going to have the possibility of trading more, etc. and that probably makes you richer.

Notice that Australia and New Zealand and and the US are outliers.

They appear to be very far away, but they are still rich. Very little market access, but still rich.

Now I could also calculate how much domestic market access you have.

So if you are in Massachusetts, how close you are.

So if I'm no longer thinking about the U.S., I'm thinking of Massachusetts, or I'm thinking of, you know, Pennsylvania.

How close you are to a world. So I'm calculating now how close you are to other places.

And there's suddenly the US is, uh, very close to big markets because every place in the U.S. is close to no big markets and same China.

Okay. So this is kind of like domestic market access, okay.

And Australia doesn't look that far away because Australia has a bunch of rich provinces, right, that are relatively close to each other.

Now I can add the two together, kind of like total market access.

The reason why we separate that is because there's some the domestic market.

If you want to explain why it's a place rich because it has explained by its domestic market access, there's kind of like an endogeneity.

If you're rich, it means you have a lot of big markets. You have a big domestic market access.

So. So domestic market access is not used too much in kind of regressions and stuff because of its endogeneity.

But from a descriptive point of view,

it's still interesting that if you sum up domestic market access with a foreign market access, the US is no longer an outlier.

Okay. But as I said before, it's somewhat endogenous, right?

Good. Now market access is going to change over time and it's going to change differentially.

Obviously, as the world economy grows, there's, you know, there's more of a global economy, etc.

But it's going to differ between where are you located.

Visa we were that growth is happening. So here is Korea and Singapore.

Since they're close to China. And China grew so much, their market access grew more than, for example, in Ireland and the UAE okay.

Which are not as close to rapidly growing places. Okay.

Now we're going to ask ourselves the question how the [INAUDIBLE]?

Why the [INAUDIBLE] would market access matter?

Okay, so you start making regressions and stuff.

And here is the relationship between market access and economic complexity.

Apparently there's a relationship between market access and economic complexity.

See a what's around you affects some how many letters you have okay.

And the question is going to be kind of what is the mechanism.

I'm going to go there. But before I go there, let me just say that we can do this thing at the city level instead of at the national level.

By the way, I'm going to do this repeatedly. I'm going to talk about remoteness at the national level, at the regional level and at the city level.

Okay. So if you think of the market access of a state, these are our states, right?

Then England is very well located and followed by Uttar Pradesh and California, I guess.

And then comes, uh, what is this?

So many South Wales does Oromia, right.

Uh, Oromia and Ethiopia. And then come Sao Paulo and New South Wales.

Okay. So there's going to be places that are more centrally located than others and so on.

And this is um, within cities we can look, calculate the market potential of a location and the nightlights as an indication of economic activity.

And we find that the bigger your market potential. And the higher your nightlights.

Yeah. I was curious. Are you considering the.

If the country's in cleaved or not? Or.

Huh? Are you considering if countries in favor or not?

Because, um, for example countries is like with doesn't have like a c axis because Lao is very close to China but not as developed, right?

Yeah. It's actually further away than than Singapore. But Singapore is all surrounded by sea.

Yeah. So so it's a good point I right now I'm not I'm not distinguishing between c axis and and I'm just taking geographic distance.

You could make it more sophisticated and but this just to show it becomes a little bit more endogenous because it will depend on infrastructure.

Do you have a road for example driving distances is going to matter in the final section when we talk about policy,

because maybe some of these policies makes you less remote, right.

What about them? Yeah.

Um, and and and it's going to come again, uh, when we talk about air travel because air travel doesn't care about landlocked and so on.

So. Okay.

Now here, what I have is. Um, a measure of remoteness.

Okay. A how how far you are from jobs.

Okay. And here it is a measure of industry diversity.

So just the effective number of industries that you have in that location.

Okay. And this is the correlation between the two.

So you are places that are remote within the US are less diverse.

So just to say that you know this. Now the question is what's the relationship between remoteness and complexity.

It could be that remoteness and complexity impact development, each one through their own challenge channel,

so that remoteness impacts diversity for the logic of market access, etc. and and complexity impacts development through, you know, its own logic.

You know, something about implicit DFP or something, but that they themselves are not related.

But um, and that would be the case if kind of like remoteness affects all activities the same.

So it's not that there's, uh, that remoteness impacts one kind of activity more than others.

So so it would reduce all activities, but it shouldn't affect the composition of activities.

But why does it seem to be related to a composition of activities?

Another possibility is that remoteness matters because it differentially impacts more complex activity, so that remoteness matters through complexity.

So if you do a mediation analysis so and for example, if you think of complex activities as requiring more interaction and than simple activities,

then um, complex activities will be impacted by remoteness more than simple activities.

Okay. And so remoteness is an enemy of complexity.

And as a consequence it might it affects development through its impact on complexity.

That would that would be an alternative hypothesis. And we can tell this apart by asking ourselves the question,

what is the statistical relationship between remoteness, complexity and, say, GDP per capita?

And the answer of the mediation analysis is that 80% of the impact of remoteness on GDP per capita goes through its impact on complexity.

Hmm. So that's interesting that remoteness impacts development through its impact on complexity.

This is just a statistical find. We don't have a good theory of why that would be the case.

Yeah, but statistically that's what the numbers suggest that you run a regression between remoteness and and complexity.

Okay. And you take that component to explain remoteness and GDP per capita.

So it's the impact of remoteness on complexity that explains 80% of what happens to GDP per capita.

Yes. Uh, I have an impact. I have a question about the impact of state expenditure.

Um. State expenditure? Yeah.

Let me clarify. So, um, when the in the early 1900s in the UK and the USA were already rich,

they started, uh, funding primary schools and they started hiring teachers.

And so then you have teachers being paid, you know, all these different communities.

And this is just like one small example.

But I'm wondering if your state is rich enough to employ people in remote areas like can be paid by the government.

Does that does that enable more remote communities to continue your way past

where you're you're now you're thinking of policy and things that we can do.

That's the second half of the lecture. I'm sorry. So we still are trying to explain the world.

We're not acting on the world. Okay. Okay. We're just explaining the world.

Okay. Uh, now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to change the complexity framework a little bit to to introduce remoteness into complexity.

Okay. And what I'm going to assume up to now, we assume that, you know, we said, look, letters are non-tradable.

You know that the question if you are one to make garments, you need textiles to make garments,

but you don't need to know how to make textiles, and you don't need to make textiles to make garments, you just bring the textiles in.

Okay. So we said the letters are have to be non-tradable.

It's things that have to be there. Okay. Now I'm going to assume maybe they are imperfectly tradable.

Maybe I some of them I can sort of bring.

If I don't have an accountant, maybe I can bring an accountant or, you know, a if I don't have,

um, a particular input, I may bring that input kind of costly in a costly manner.

Okay. And so we're going to assume that inputs are going to be have some trade ability.

They're not perfectly non-tradable. Okay.

And we're going to assume that the cost of bringing those intermediate inputs in is going to be a function of, uh, of how far they are.

Okay. Now.

This will disproportionately impact complex products because complex products require more letters.

So if the more complex the product, the more likely it is that you don't have a letter because you need more letters.

So the more letters you would have to bring in, and since it's costly to bring it in, you know the customer, it will be for you.

Okay. And one implication is that diversification will be easier in places that are closer to missing letters.

So if you're close to a place that has a lot of letters,

maybe you know you can bring those letters in in an easier way than if they were farther away.

Okay. And.

So. And they will have an easier capacity to diversify because they can bring in the missing letters from somewhere else.

Okay, good. So, you know, we know that complex products require bringing a lot of inputs from from many places.

So I can calculate how far you are from inputs.

And in here we are going to use a trick.

By the way, we're giving you a data set.

This data set is different from the trade data set that you would use for complexity analysis.

Because this data set is classified is international trade but classified by industry and not by product.

So say the previous one was a harmonized system HS classification.

What we have done is we have converted the HS classification into an industry classification.

Okay.

So instead of saying these are garments, we'd say these are the exports of the garment industry and then use the industry classification of garments.

Not the product classification. Okay.

The reason we do that is because we need to know what are the inputs of a product, and to know what are the inputs of a product.

We need to go good input output matrix. And we have a good input output matrix in the US.

So we will use the US input output matrix to say that these are the inputs for any body who's making a product anywhere in the world.

Okay. And so this is the input output matrix.

It's right here okay. And we are going to calculate how far you are from the inputs of uh of a product measured by.

So you have the this is country. This is your country, say country A and you're looking across the world.

A um, I mean, you can say you need your country.

A you're looking across the world for a set of inputs.

So you're buying these inputs from the rest of the world. How far that those inputs travel?

So you bought this from Germany, you bought this from Spain, bought this from, etc.

On average, weighted average. How much did your inputs travel okay.

And we have two variants here that who said that you necessarily have to buy from abroad.

Maybe you bought from yourself. Well I would know that you bought it from yourself if you are good at that input.

So I can calculate it in case if you have comparative advantage in that input, I can calculate that you maybe bought it from yourself.

And you know, if your country is a country of 100km², that means that the square root of area is something like a distance.

So something related to a square root of the area is going to be the distance to yourself.

Okay. So I can calculate the actual distance traveled by your inputs.

And again two versions. Not considering that you're buying from yourself and actually considering that you are.

But I could also calculate the minimum distance two inputs.

So I would I would look around the world and ask, which is the closest country in the world that has comparative advantage in that input?

And then I would I would take that to be the distance.

Okay. So now I'm not calculating distance from markets I'm calculating distance from inputs.

This is no longer going to be uh a variable. So you know for Australia this is going to be a variable for Australia making cars.

So it's going to be a country industry variable okay. Because every industry will have different inputs.

And these inputs are going to be differently located in the world.

So in the same way as we have before say density was a country product measure.

So it's how close are your monkeys to that product in your country.

Right. So it's a country product made. This is a country industry variable.

Okay. How close are you to inputs. Okay.

Now for example, let's take the automobile manufacturing.

According to the US input output matrix, there's a ton of inputs to making cars.

If you use the inverse Hirschman hyphen index okay.

Hertz. The Hirschman Hirschman index is the sum of the squares of the share.

The inverse of that is what we call the effective number.

We've already heard of the effective number before.

So if you have a country and has two parties, one has 51% of the vote and the other one has 49% of the vote.

And it's like you have two parties, right?

But if you have a country where one party has 90% of the votes and the other one has 10% of the vote, you don't really have two parties.

Okay. So the inverse here is going to give you a number like one point.

1 or 1.2. That's a number of parties you effectively have.

Okay. So this is the effective number of parts.

You have 11 parts okay. And and these are the most important parts.

Okay. So that's what the input output matrix would give you.

So now if you go to Austria you say these are the top four parts.

How far would you be from a factories that make engines 216km.

And how far would you be from factories that make train parts?

200km and so on. And how much would it be from factory make sitting?

Well, 200km and and metal stamping 200km.

Okay. So the average is 233km for Austria.

You do the same calculation for Australia. You get 7000km.

Okay. That's how far you are from inputs.

Okay. So this is a now for all the countries in the world the automobile manufacturing distance.

So these are the countries that are far New Zealand, Australia, Brazil, South Africa, Paraguay, etc.

And these are the countries that are close. Right. Slovakia, Croatia, Hungary, Austria etc.

So you see that if you are in Europe, you're very close to imports.

If you are other places, you are very far from. Yes. Um, I got this question.

Brazil produces a lot of cars, actually. So who?

Brazil. Brazil? Yes, yes. Um, so at one point they we try to explain them.

So, um, so it means that for Brazil,

it would have been much harder to develop cars because they would have had to develop the whole value chain internally.

So getting into cars would have been a much longer jump for monkeys, because it would have been extremely costly to bring the parts in.

So it would only the monkey would only jump if you put the monkey on a helicopter or something,

which the Brazilians did with a lot of protectionism and so on.

And still Brazilian cars are way uncompetitive,

and the only reason why Argentina is able to export cars to Brazil is because they are exporting at multiple multiples of the international price.

So. Now, interestingly, and I'm not sure that we got this graph completely correct, but it's interesting to ask yourself the question,

how far are countries from the markets to which they sell, and how far are countries from the inputs that they need to buy?

And what we find is that this is a 45 degree line.

Countries are much closer to their inputs than to their markets.

So this suggests that being close to inputs is much more, much more critical than being close to markets.

Okay. And this we think is a new finding.

And it might explain why, you know, if you look at value chains, they're all concentrated in North America or in Europe or in China.

Right. And the rest of the world has a lot of difficulty getting into these value chains,

because you don't want to be too far from your inputs, but you don't care as much about how far you are from the outputs.

Okay. That's that's something we will this will eventually become a paper for you.

Okay. So now I'm going to calculate.

A what is the impact of market access.

Distance two and two value chains and distance to product density.

Okay. And product density.

So this is the my I my old friend. How far are your monkeys from this empty tree.

Okay. Density. And this is how far are your from.

How close are you to customers. And this is how close are you to value chains.

Okay. And you see that they all come in density is is very robust.

Yeah, but ehm, these are normalized standard deviations.

And since I told you that the standard deviation to value chains is much shorter.

So these numbers say this is 1000 and this is 5000.

Right. So it's like you're a fifth of the distance to.

You are much closer to value chains. These are units of standard deviation.

The standard deviation here is shorter than theirs. So these numbers we haven't worked out what's economic significance.

But now we have a framework where we can improve what we can mix.

Your density your monkeys your distance to inputs and your distance to markets.

And they all seem to come in both. These are cross-sectional regressions.

Both. If I want to explain your level of exports, if I want to explain your competitiveness in exports,

or we've revealed competitive advantage and whether you are your you have comparative advantage above one or or not.

Okay. There's A10 variable and interest in all of them.

And dynamically. If I ask what does? Does it do to the probability of jumping to.

The probability that the monkey jumps to a new tree.

Okay. The monkey was not there. What's the probability that he will be there, say appeared over the period of five years?

You see, the density matters, but distance to markets and distance to value chain still matter.

Okay. Yes. Uh, in this analysis, all your inputs are treated equally.

Because. Because thinking about like. No, they're not. That proves, like, more and more difficult to transport or that I water.

So like the cost of transportation of each input could be very different.

Yes. So, so they don't come all in with the same weight because in the input output matrix they have different weights okay.

It weights in terms of percentage of the cost of production.

So they have different weights. But the distances are measured in a variable.

That is related to what you say that I'm going to introduce in a couple of slides, which is what's the average how how movable is the stuff.

And I'll introduce a variable, uh, that will capture sort of like how movable is the stuff that's implicit already in these calculations.

Okay. So now we have kind of like integrated complexity.

If you want density with these geographic variables. And they all seem to come in.

And that's going to allow us, when we are in a certain place to, to introduce the location of the place and into its diversification strategy.

Now, as I always say that a good question gets answered by the next slide.

A really good question gets answered by the next slide. This is the next slide.

So this is the next slide. We know from empirically we know that trade falls very significantly with distance.

If you double a the distance trade declines by half.

That's the elasticity to distance. However when you when you double the distance and we can look at transportation costs.

Okay. When we have, you know, the difference between FOB and CIF in international trade, you know, free on board and cost insurance and freight.

So besides insurance and freight, um, doubling the distance increases transportation costs by 12%.

So why is it that trade falls by 50% if transportation costs only increased by 12% when you double the business?

So why is the response to distance so sensitive when transportation costs don't seem to be so sensitive?

That's a puzzle. And one possibility is that the channel through which this dance impacts trade is not only transportation cost,

but there may there may be other channels than transportation costs and in particular the cost of establishing a relationship.

So before I sell anything to you, I have to know you.

I have to negotiate with you. I have to agree, you have to look at my staff, etc. so there are cost to the relationship,

which is like a fixed cost of establishing the relationship.

But once we have established the relationship, then I can sell a little bit more to you,

a little bit less to you, but I've already paid for the fixed costs. Okay.

So for example, if a Chilean one winemaker wants to sell his wine in Mumbai.

He would have to take two flights, minimum two flights.

That will take him at least 30 hours.

Okay, now if an Australian wine maker wants to sell in Mumbai, he can take a direct flight to Mumbai in 12 hours.

So suddenly, you know, for a Chilean to establish commercial relationships in Mumbai is going to be a much in more complicated endeavor.

And in addition, you know, English is more or less spoken in Mumbai, although with an accent that is makes it hard for me to understand.

But that's my problem. While the Chileans are notorious for their language skills.

And so this is going to be reflected not in the average amount of wine that each Chilean exporter sells in Mumbai,

but in the number of Chilean exporters that are willing to pay the fixed cost to sell in Mumbai.

Okay, so something that is happening on the extensive marginal trade, not on the intensive margin of trade.

So that would be a hypothesis. And um, Sebastian boosters who worked a lot on this, on, on the papers behind this presentation,

who's uh, a fellow at the growth lab, he's a former MBA, Idi and he did his PhD here.

He has a paper showing that 60% of the impact of distance on trade is through these fixed costs, not through the variable transportation costs.

Okay. So that is going to be important when we try to think later on, what can we do to lower the friction imposed by distance?

Okay. Got a lot of it is not just the transportation cost.

It's fixed costs of some kind.

And the idea is that complex production requires more inputs and more inputs implies that each one of them you need to negotiate.

So each one of them you need to pay this fixed cost. So the more complex the production, the bigger the fixed cost you would need to pay.

Yes, ma'am. I was in Q and yeah okay.

The transport costs increase marginally compared to the distance.

Right. But if I can buy one from two different countries, I assume they're similar.

And you don't need one for it to be 1% expensive, right? I would prefer the cheaper ones.

So it's more like a it's not the actual cost than others. The rate of the increasing cost.

So a certain way would be a little cheaper than you can win.

And that would be enough for me to only buy one. Right? Assuming.

So you're saying if the elasticities of substitution are very high, a small increase in transport costs in A could do the trick.

Say, if it was a an identical goal, there would only be one price, right?

And m a yes.

But empirically what we observe is that.

And there's another paper that shows that empirically what you observe is that the average sale per firm is not much affected,

but the number of firms that are in the business is affected.

So there are other evidence that suggests that it's not it's not a super high elasticity of substitution, but that it's a different source of cost.

But but you make a good point that it could have been a potential answer.

So so now we are. We understand a little bit how these trade frictions might be related to distance in ways that are not pure transportation cost.

And in the trade literature, they love to use this thing that they call iceberg costs.

This is this idea that you are transporting an iceberg.

And the iceberg sort of melts between the time you ship it and the time it gets there.

And so it kind of like erodes the quantity that you're selling.

It's just a convenient mathematical trick. So this suggests that iceberg costs are not the right way to think about these things.

Now, as I said before, other activities are impacted by distance.

And here a.

These are sort of like these these gravity equations for different things,

for example for trade for in business travel and for foreign direct investment.

And you see that business travel and foreign direct investment are even more impacted by distance.

And one way to illustrate that.

Is these graphs that I, I did for a presentation with Marty Hartog and Frank in that we prepared for the National Bank of Austria.

So they asked, uh, they asked us to talk and we said, okay, look, this is Austria, okay?

And we asked. Where does Austria?

Um, have foreign subsidiaries?

Okay. Where are foreign subsidiaries? Subsidiaries of Austria.

And you see that they are super close to Austria. This is for all industries or all economic activities.

And this is only for manufacturing. If you see that, it's amazing how kind of like they locate on the other side of the border, right?

They locate super close. So this kind of FDI, this is how close are you to your subsidiaries?

In this paper?

Yeah. Danny Bahar was a PhD also and did his Ph.D. also.

Here was my student. And so he takes different industries of different complexity and asks,

how far are your subsidiaries from you as a function of how complex is your industry?

The idea is that the more complex the industry, the more knowledge you need to manage the industry, right?

So the more interaction you need between yourself and the subsidiary.

So aim, aim.

What he finds is that the more complex the industry, the more it the case with distance and distance between the company and its subsidiary,

but that the distance doesn't come in symmetrically, that a longitude matters more than latitude.

Now with latitude, distance implies a climate changes.

But with longitude. What matters is time zones.

So time zones matter more than pure distance.

So this suggests that it's also the need to coordinate human say how many of the 9 to 5 working time do you overlap?

So the more intensive they are, the more complex the industry, the more intensive the intellectual interactions.

And that's the reason why longitude would matter more than latitude. Okay.

So that's another kind of. And then this paper what we have is data on business travel.

We had from Mastercard. We had a day down on which country.

Went on business. To which other country? Okay.

And then we asked them in. What is the impact of business trouble on.

So, so the assumption is that if Italians travel to your country and you learn to make pizza, right.

So if you get people from a certain country, we know what that country has comparative advantage in.

So they probably they went on business with something that they're good at.

So what's the likelihood that you become good at at the things that your people visiting you are good at?

Okay. And we found that business travel has an impact on employment and on exports of the industries that your people,

that your business travelers are coming from. Okay. So again.

Now business travel has an elasticity of -1.6, which falls a lot with distance.

The number of establishments follows a lot with distance, with a smaller elasticity, and employment at these establishments falls more with this.

So all these things, a fault with distance and a distance also reduces the number of migrants you have in the other country,

and it reduces the number of collaborations and patents with slightly smaller elasticity.

Okay. Typically when you put, you know, do you share a language, do share a history, etc., these things always come in okay.

Now this is their kind of like killer of the of the thing that says suppose you are a remote place like Brazil,

say, and you are able to make, uh, a complex product.

It will be very hard for you to ship that complex product very far away,

because you've already kind of, like, paid for the cost of, you know, you know, making it here.

You cannot pay for the extra cost of sending it back there very far.

Okay. That's the intuition.

So I'm going to illustrate that by comparing two countries that are very, very close to each other in language space, but not in geographic space.

So I'm going to compare Austria to Australia. This is the exports of Austria to Germany, and this is the exports of Austria to the rest of the world.

They kind of like look the same. No. Very similar.

These are the exports of Australia to New Zealand. And these are the exports of Australia to the rest of the world.

So all of this complex production disappears and only the mineral products survive.

So this suggests that if you went through the trouble of making something in Australia,

kind of you can sell it in New Zealand, because New Zealand is also very far away and you're close to them.

And so every other competitor would have to get, you know, all the way here.

Right. But you cannot get back. So and this is, um, a regression that says the same thing in regression language, which has that distance impacts.

What I have here is the complexity of your exports okay.

The complexity of your exports as a function of, um, how far is the destination.

So I'm asking what's how does the composition of your export basket change with distance.

And this says that the bigger the distance, uh, the lower the complexity of the things you export.

So you export more complex things nearby, less complex things far away.

But the the effect of distance on that depends on your market access.

So if you're in Australia, you have a very high market access.

It kind of like diminishes the impact of distance on complexity.

If you have very little market access like Australia, then the impact of distance on complexity is going to be there.

Okay. So that's another finding that we have.

Good, good. So now we go to policy.

So we now have a framework to think, okay. Tell me where your country is.

I can locate it vis-a-vis everything else. Or tell me where your state is located.

Tell me where your city is. I can locate you. So I can think of two strategies.

One is circumventing remoteness, which is identifying products that can tolerate greater distance to customers or to inputs.

Okay, so maybe I can find some products that are more resilient to distance.

Okay. And the other one is reducing your remoteness.

So it's not that I'm going to choose a particular diversification strategy that I'm going to do things that improve my my ability to connect.

Okay. So for strategy one,

I'm going to invent some numbers and we're actually sharing them with you so you

can incorporate them into your assignment and into your final presentation.

Okay. We can have product level matrix which is on average how much does this product travel.

Okay. So um m and we can also calculate on average how far does the inputs of a product travel.

Okay. So a product anything but how far.

It just that is I think every bilateral relationship in the world I weigh them and then I aggregate them and they take an average for the whole world.

So this is going to be a product level characteristic. So I'm averaging over for the whole world.

So this is a product characteristic okay. And I'm going to also want to know what is the percentage of air travel by this product.

Because air travel is going to get rid of some of the frictions of trade.

But you know, some things you put on an airplane and other things you don't put on an airplane.

So and then some industries can be more workable than remotely and other industries, you have to be there or not.

You cannot do from afar. So telework ability is going to be another way of choosing things that are less sensitive to remoteness and countries.

So then I'm going to have some country level characteristics and country level characteristics.

I've already introduced distance to the world's GDP. I presented it to you earlier.

But also what's the average distance traveled by your imports?

So how far are you from the people who sell to you?

So your average how much does your your imports travel relative to how much these products travel in the world?

So those are your imports travel half the distance that they normally travel twice the distance, etc.

And I can do the same thing for exports. And then I can develop some country product characteristics.

So these are now currencies for a country in a product.

And and they're I can calculate for a country what's its distance to its value chain or what's its distance to the market.

Okay. So these are country product characteristics that we're going to incorporate in choosing our diversification strategy.

Okay, so this is how far the products travel.

Okay. This is distance to market. And the products that travel the least are eggs, ice cream, gypsum, asphalt shingles okay.

Cheese. Okay. Those are the ones that travel the least.

And the ones that travel the most are copper, nickel, zinc, oilseeds, iron mining and minerals.

So you see a lot of, um, mainly military armored vehicle, tank and tank component manufacturing.

Okay. So these are, I think ranked by how far you are from customers.

These things travel a lot. These things don't travel too much. And this is how far you are from your inputs.

You know, people who make eggs are not too far from animal feed.

Okay. Ice cream. They're not too far from the milk.

But these things can be very far from their inputs.

Okay. Now, this is, um.

These are ten workable occupations. And, um, and this is a, you know, what percentage of the fellow workable jobs are in these industries?

And these are occupations, and this is industries.

What's their share of telling workable jobs in different industries?

And the idea that the more a workable an industry, the more you can supply it from afar.

So this is business services and stuff that you can locate more on a larger distance.

So this is another another verb. And this is relative to the world.

And this is for each product that you import. How much did that product travel on average from all of your suppliers?

Vis-a-vis how much that product travels in the world. So the average for the world is always one.

This is it. Did your imports travel more than the world?

And this is did your exports travel more than the world?

And notice that New Zealand, Chile for example, look at Chile about 18 and Brazil and Argentina,

their imports travel much more than the imports of the world.

And their exports have to travel much more than the exports of the world,

controlling for what it is that we export, because soybeans are the things that travel the most.

In spite of that, Argentina, Brazil export that even controlling for that, they're very far.

Okay, Cuba, it's super close to the US, but since they have the embargo, their things actually come from very far.

And, you know, country like Cambodia or Lesotho, uh,

they their imports travel very little because Lesotho buys everything from South Africa and Cambodia buys everything from around.

But they sell them to the U.S. or to Europe, their garments.

And so their exports travel much more than the world's about go so, so,

so this is now another characteristic you have for your country that you can start asking yourself is my country?

Is is remoteness a competitive disadvantage or a competitive advantage for my country?

How much should I weigh it. So. So now we have the relative distance to value chains and the relative distance to markets.

And you see that Austria has a bunch of industries that are both close to markets and and close to industries.

Right. In this quadrant Australia has nothing.

But there are some industries here where they would have to travel more than the world average, but not too much.

Right. So in. So this this already tells you now for for a particular country this is our country.

Industry variables which things are kind of like more feasible.

Which things will be more tolerant of for distance given where you are and where your markets are and where the inputs are.

So this I think is useful for thinking diversification strategies.

Okay. Um. Now airplanes do not care about borders, about ruggedness, about the quality of your infrastructure, etc. except for the airport, right?

And much of the cost of airplanes is the cost of taking off and landing.

But once you're in the air a little bit more distance, a little bit less distance doesn't have that much more to cost.

So it means that a the cost per kilometer goes down with distance in airplanes,

because you amortize the fixed cost of going up over, over a bigger distance, okay.

So it's less sensitive to distance and less sensitive to, you know, not being landlocked, etc.

So it's important to know if you have a product that can tolerate air travel because maybe you are in Ethiopia and Ethiopia, landlocked,

etc. but if it's a product that you can put on an airplane and ship, then you know, then there's a lot of disadvantages that disappeared.

And these are the products with highest air intensity.

Don't ask me who buys human hair and what are these gases?

And they probably are going or some. But platinum watches, synthetic precious stones, diamonds,

etc. and things that don't go on airplanes are things like, you know, cows and sheep and horse meat.

So this is kind of like a litmus test that the algorithm that we use to to identify these things work and that,

you know, things that in travel are things that are pricey per unit of per kilogram,

that are fresh, so that you kind of waste not so fresh produce and flowers, travel on airplanes and so on, some intermediate goods, etc.

So so you can so this is for Ethiopia.

We did this. This is our low hanging fruit index.

So this mixes aim density with the complexity with opportunity to gain in some weights giving a lot of waste to to density.

So things that are near and and this is how um transportable by air it is.

So now now you can find products that that are both close to your monkeys, but that you can ship by air.

Okay. And strategy two involves reducing distance.

Um, and Claudia must feel now you know that this is the and and that's their thing.

Yeah. Of course I'm around Millennium in Boca.

That's BRT. So you can reduce the distance. Right. Or for example, this was the way came.

The East Coast was connected to the West Coast before 1912.

So there were a, you know, they would stop here in Puerto Montt and they would stop here in Valparaiso in Chile,

and they would refurbish new ships that went from the east coast to the west coast.

But then when they opened the Panama Canal, now that you didn't have to go through Chile anymore,

and Chile became in some sense much more remote because it was no longer in the in a trade route.

But also, you know, they, they, they created uh, the, uh, the um, Union Pacific Railway to the west.

And the railway really, you know, transformed these places.

This was the population of these places in 1870, like there were 5.5, 5700 people, 5700 people in in Los Angeles in 1870.

And now they're 18.6 million. There's a humongous increase in population because suddenly these places became much more connected.

That didn't happen in Cheyenne too much, and it didn't happen in Santa Fe, New Mexico, too much.

But it happens dramatically in other places that were super remote. So how did these places become less remote?

Well, Las Vegas was nothing, right? It became a tourist destination.

They invented the idea that it would legalize gambling that was prohibited in California,

but they benefited from the fact that California used to be remote.

But now California is huge, right? Los Angeles is huge.

So? So a lot of people moved into Los Angeles.

So now they are close to a market that was not there before.

So suddenly you can have Los Angeles. And let me not tell the story.

And so this is how the US was populated.

So you see a place suddenly becomes less remote because thing happens around it.

So I like to think of, you know, what is sort of like the slow evolution of remoteness, of things happening around you.

And so again, what should this letter do to maximize its return?

Maybe this letter decides to go here, right.

This regression shows that the likelihood this comes from our Saudi paper.

No, no this is no from a different paper. So, um, ehm.

If you have ehm if your people leave and start working with multinational corporations as managers,

that increases the likelihood that that corporation is going to invest in your country.

So there might be interesting ways in which not only, you know, people leave and send remittances.

